Most human beings, Paulinus, complain about the meanness of nature, because we are born into a brief voyage of life, and because this allotted term of ours runs so swiftly away that, with few exceptions, life leaves us in the lurch just when we are getting ready to live. And it is not the common herd and the unthinking crowd alone that mourn over what they regard as this universal evil; the same feeling has called forth complaints also from men who were famous. Hence the dictum of the greatest of doctors: "Life is short, art is long." Hence also the complaint of Aristotle, - most inappropriate for a wise man, - when he takes nature to task for indulging animals with such long existences that they can live through five or ten human ages, while a far shorter limit is set for man who is born for so many and such great achievements.

It is not that we have a short time to live, but that we waste a lot of it. Life is long enough, and a sufficiently generous amount has been given to us for the highest achievements if it were all well invested. But when it is wasted in heedless luxury and spent on no good activity, we are forced at last by death's final constraint to realize that it has passed away before we knew it was passing. So it is: we are not given a short life but we make it short, and we are not ill-supplied but wasteful of it. Just as when ample and princely wealth falls to a bad owner it is squandered in a moment, but wealth however modest, if entrusted to a good custodian, increases with use, so our lifetime extends for a lot if you manage it properly.

Why do we complain of nature? She has shown herself kindly; life, if you know how to use it, is long. But one man is gripped by insatiable greed, another by a laborious diligence in useless tasks. One man is soaked in wine, another sluggish with idleness. One man is worn out by political ambition, which is always at the mercy of the judgment of others. Another through hope of profit is driven to trade, leading him to visit all lands and seas. Some are tormented by a passion for army life, always intent on inflicting dangers on others or anxious about danger to themselves. Some are worn out by the self-imposed servitude of thankless attendance on the great. Many are kept busy by either pursuing other people’s fortune or complaining about their own. Many have no fixed purpose, but are tossed about by ever-changing, fickle, and dissatisfied plans. Some have no aim at all for their life's course, but death takes them by surprise as they yawn and languish.

You must not think a man has lived long because he has white hair and wrinkles: he has not lived long, just existed long. For suppose you should think that a man had had a long voyage who had been caught in a raging storm as he left harbour, and tossed hither and thither by a succession of winds that raged from different quarters, and driven round and round in a circle. He did not have a long voyage, but was much tossed about.
