It is the month of December, and yet the city is at this very moment in a sweat. License is given to the general merrymaking. Everything resounds with mighty preparations, – as if the Saturnalia differed at all from the usual business day! So true it is that the difference is nil, that I regard as correct the remark of the man who said: "Once December was a month; now it is a year."

If I had you with me, I should be glad to consult you and find out what you think should be done, – whether we ought to make no change in our daily routine, or whether, in order not to be out of sympathy with the ways of the public, we should dine in jauntier fashion and doff the toga. As it is now, we Romans have changed our dress for the sake of pleasure and holiday-making, though in former times that was only done when the State was disturbed and had fallen on evil days. I am sure that, if I know you right, you would have played the part of an umpire who wishes neither to be perverted by the popular mood nor to become conspicuous by departing from it.

But there is another way: let us keep our holiday in our own hearts, but without extravagance. It is quite possible to be festive without being extravagant. I like to see a man who can be merry without rioting, who can enjoy himself without losing his head. And so, although I have ordered a more liberal dinner than usual, I have not made any change in my dress. I shall not lay aside the toga, but shall wear it even at dinner; for I do not wish to be the only man in Rome who is not in holiday attire.

But here is a problem: how can we test our spirit? How can we know whether we are brave enough to stand poverty, unless we practice it? And so I suggest to you, Lucilius, that you set aside a certain number of days, during which you shall be content with the scantiest and cheapest fare, with coarse and rough dress, saying to yourself the while: "Is this the condition that I feared?" It is precisely in times of immunity from care that the soul should toughen itself beforehand for occasions of greater stress, and it is while Fortune is kind that she should fortify herself against her violence. In days of peace the soldier performs maneuvers, throws up earthworks with no enemy in sight, and wearies himself by gratuitous toil, in order that he may be equal to unavoidable toil. If you would not have a man flinch when the crisis comes, train him before it comes. Such is the course which those men have followed who, in their imitation of poverty, have every month come almost to want, that they might never recoil from what they had so often practiced.

You need not suppose that I mean meals like Timon’s, or "paupers' huts," or any other device which luxury uses for a fad; I mean the real thing – a pallet and a coarse cloak, and bread that is hard and dirty. Endure all this for three or four days at a time, sometimes for more, so that it may be a test of yourself instead of a mere hobby. Then, I assure you, my dear Lucilius, you will leap for joy when filled with a pennyworth of food, and you will understand that a man’s peace of mind does not depend upon Fortune; for, even when angry, she grants enough for our needs.
