LETTER C1. ON THE FUTILITY OF PLANNING AHEAD

Every day, every hour, shows us what a nothing we are. Every day some new reminder recalls us from our petty forgetfulness; and then Man, planning for life eternal, is forced to look upon death. What do you think I have in my mind when I say this? I am thinking of Cornelius Senecio, a distinguished and capable Roman knight, whom you knew: from humble beginnings he had advanced himself to fortune, and the rest of the path lay easy before him. For it is easier to grow in dignity than to make a start; and money, too, is very slow in coming when you are poor, but once you have a certain amount, it increases rapidly. He had already acquired a large fortune, and had only to wait for it to flow in; but while he was making plans for its investment, while he was scraping together money from every quarter, he was carried off, money-bags and all. And just when he was catching at the very best things, he breathed his last.

It is a great folly to plan for the future. We are led on by our hopes, and we think that we can order our lives as if we were gods. But while we are making our plans, death steps in and stops us. And even if death does not stop us, old age does. What is the use of making plans for a long life, when we do not know if we shall be alive tomorrow? The man who plans for the future is like a man who sows seed in the sand; he is wasting his time and his labour.

Let us then, my dear Lucilius, live every day as if it were our last. Let us not be like those who are always getting ready to live, but let us live now. For he who is always getting ready to live, never lives. The present time is the only time that we have; the past is gone, and the future is not yet here. Let us then make the best of the present moment, and let us not worry about what the future may bring. If we live in this way, we shall have no fear of death; for we shall know that we have lived well, and that we have done our duty.

And what, after all, is death? It is but a release from the cares and troubles of this life. It is a rest from our labours. It is a return to the earth from which we came. Why then should we fear it? Is it not better to die than to live in misery? Is it not better to be at peace than to be tormented by anxiety? Let us then welcome death when it comes, as a friend and a deliverer. Let us not cling to life, as if it were a precious thing; for life is only a loan, and we must pay it back when the time comes.

Therefore, my dear Lucilius, let us live with a tranquil mind, and let us meet death with courage. Let us not be afraid of what may happen to us, for nothing can happen to us that is not in accordance with nature. And whatever is in accordance with nature is good. Let us then accept our fate with resignation, and let us not complain of our lot. For the gods know what is best for us, and they order all things for our good.
