Greetings from Seneca to his friend Lucilius.

It is the month of December, and yet the city is at this very moment in a sweat. License is given to the general public. Every thing resounds with mighty preparations, as if the Saturnalia differed at all from the usual business day; so true it is that the difference is nil, that I regard as correct the remark of the man who said: "Were it not for the fact that we are in the month of December, we should be justified in saying that it is always Saturnalia."

But if you will follow my advice, you will not copy the bad example of the mob, by giving yourself up to luxury because the whole world is doing so; nor, on the other hand, will you make yourself conspicuous by abstaining from the general merriment. For it is possible to keep holiday without extravagance.

However, I am going to be bold enough to prescribe for you a course of action which I myself practice. Set aside a certain number of days, during which you shall be content with the scantiest and cheapest fare, with coarse and rough dress, saying to yourself the while: "Is this the condition that I feared?"

It is precisely in times of immunity from care that the soul should toughen itself beforehand for occasions of greater stress, and it is while Fortune is kind that she should fortify herself against her violence. In days of peace the soldier performs maneuvers, throws up earthworks with no enemy in sight, and wearies himself by unnecessary toil, in order that he may be equal to it when it is necessary. If you would not have a man flinch when the crisis comes, train him before it comes.

So I demand of you: set apart certain days on which you shall give up your heavy diet and your full wine-cups, and make trial of your endurance. Start practicing poverty. "Let the pallet be a real one, and the coarse cloak; let the bread be hard and grimy." Endure all this for three or four days at a time, sometimes for more, so that it may be a test of yourself instead of a mere hobby. Then, I assure you, my dear Lucilius, you will leap for joy when filled with a pennyworth of food, and you will understand that a man's peace of mind does not depend upon Fortune; for, even when angry, she grants enough for our needs.

There is no reason, however, why you should think that you are doing anything great; for you will merely be doing what many thousands of slaves and many thousands of poor men are doing every day. But you may credit yourself with this item,—that you will not be doing it under compulsion, and that it will be as easy for you to endure it permanently as to make the experiment from time to time.

Farewell.
