We have now to see whether anger is in accordance with nature, and whether it is useful and, in some measure, worth keeping.

Whether it is in accordance with nature will become evident if we look at man. What is more gentle than man while he is in a right state of mind? But what is more cruel than anger? What is more loving to others than man? What more hostile than anger? Man is born to assist, anger to destroy. Man seeks to combine, anger to separate. Man is beneficial, anger is destructive. Man helps even strangers, anger attacks even the dearest friends. Man is ready to sacrifice himself for the good of others, anger to plunge into peril if it can but drag another down with it. Who, then, is more ignorant of the nature of things than he who ascribes this savage and pernicious vice to Nature’s best and most polished work?

Anger, as I have said, is eager to punish; and that such a desire should exist in man's peaceful breast is least of all according to his nature; for human life is founded on benefits and harmony, and is bound together into an alliance for the common help, not by terror, but by mutual love.

"What then? Is not correction sometimes necessary?" Of course it is; but with discretion, not with anger. For it will not hurt, but will heal under the guise of hurting. Just as we apply the flame to the spear-shaft, not to burn it, but to straighten it, so we correct our fellow-men, not for the sake of hurting them, but to improve them.

"But," you say, "anger is useful, because it makes men more ready to fight." That is like saying that drunkenness is useful because it makes men bold and reckless, or that madness is useful because it gives men great strength. But these things are not useful; they are merely dangerous. The strength that they give is not the strength of health, but the strength of delirium.

Reason is strong only so long as it stands aloof from the passions; if it once mixes with them, it loses its authority and cannot hold them in check. The mind, if it plunges into anger, love, or the other passions, has no power to check its own impetuosity; its weight and the downward tendency of its vice must needs carry it on and drive it to the bottom.

Therefore, the best plan is to reject straightway the first incentives to anger, to resist its very beginnings, and to take care not to be betrayed into it: for if once it begins to carry us away, it is hard to stop the course, because, when once the mind has been thrown off its balance, it has no longer any control over itself.
