DE BREVITATE VITAE (On the Shortness of Life)

Chapter I

1. The majority of mortals, Paulinus, complain bitterly of the spitefulness of Nature, because we are born for a brief span of life, because even this space that has been granted to us rushes by so speedily and so swiftly that all save a very few find life at an end just when they are getting ready to live. Nor is it merely the common herd and the unthinking crowd that bemoan what is, as men deem it, an universal evil; the same feeling has called forth complaint also from men who were famous. It was this that made the greatest of physicians exclaim that "life is short, art is long."
2. It was this that led Aristotle, while expostulating with Nature, to enter an indictment most unbecoming to a wise man - that, while she has indulged animals with such a length of days that they can live for five or ten generations, man, who is born for so many and such great achievements, is cut off in the midst of his career.
3. It is not that we have a short space of time, but that we waste much of it. Life is long enough, and it has been given in sufficiently generous measure to allow the accomplishment of the very greatest things if the whole of it is well invested. But when it is squandered in luxury and carelessness, when it is devoted to no good end, forced at last by the ultimate necessity we perceive that it has passed away before we were aware that it was passing.
4. So it is: the life we receive is not short, but we make it so, nor do we have any lack of it, but we are wasteful of it. Just as great and princely wealth is scattered in a moment when it comes into the hands of a bad owner, while wealth however limited, if it is entrusted to a good guardian, increases by use, so our life is amply long for him who orders it properly.

Chapter II

1. Why do we complain of Nature? She has shown herself kindly; life, if you know how to use it, is long. But one man is possessed by an avarice that is insatiable, another by a toilsome devotion to tasks that are useless; one man is besotted with wine, another is paralyzed by sloth; one man is exhausted by an ambition that always hangs upon the decision of others, another, driven on by the greed of the trader, is led to travel over all lands and all seas by the hope of gain; some are tormented by a passion for war and are always either bent upon inflicting danger on others or concerned about their own; some there are who are worn out by voluntary servitude in a thankless attendance upon the great; many are kept busy either in the pursuit of other men's fortune or in complaining of their own; many, following no fixed aim, shifting and inconstant and dissatisfied, are plunged by their fickleness into plans that are ever new; some have no fixed principle by which to guide their course, but Fate takes them unawares while they loll and yawn - so surely does it happen that I cannot doubt the truth of that which the greatest of poets said with all the seeming of an oracle: "The part of life we really live is small." For all the rest of existence is not life, but merely time.
2. Vices beset us and surround us on every side, and they do not permit us to rise and lift up our eyes for the discernment of truth, but they keep us down when once they have overwhelmed us and we are chained to lust. Their victims are never allowed to return to their true selves; if ever they chance to find some release, like the waters of the deep sea which continue to heave even after the storm is past, they are tossed about, and no rest from their lusts abides.
3. Do you think that I am speaking of the wretches whose evils are admitted? Look at those whose prosperity men flock to behold; they are smothered by their blessings. How many are burdened by their wealth! How many are dragged off by their eloquence and the daily necessity of displaying their powers! How many are pale from constant pleasures! How many are left no freedom by the throng of clients that surrounds them! In short, run through the list of all these men from the lowest to the highest - this man desires an advocate, this one answers the call, that one is on trial, that one defends him, that one gives sentence; no one asserts his claim to himself, everyone is wasted for the sake of another. Ask about the men whose names are known by heart, and you will see that these are the marks that distinguish them: A cultivates B and B cultivates C; no one cultivates himself.
4. And then certain men show the most senseless indignation - they complain of the insolence of their superiors, because they were too busy to see them when they wished an audience! But can anyone have the hardihood to complain of the pride of another when he never has leisure for himself? He at least, whoever he is, though with insolent face, did sometimes look upon you, he did listen to your words, he did admit you to his side; but you never deign to look upon yourself, never give ear to yourself. There is no reason, therefore, why you should lay to the charge of anyone these services, for you performed them, not because you desired to be with another, but because you were unable to be in your own company.
