Paulinus, the majority of mortals complain bitterly of the spitefulness of Nature, because we are born for a brief span of life, because even this space that has been granted to us rushes by so speedily and so swiftly that all save a very few find life at an end just when they are getting ready to live.

It is not that we have a short time to live, but that we waste a lot of it. Life is long enough, and a sufficiently generous amount has been given to us for the highest achievements if it were all well invested. But when it is wasted in heedless luxury and spent on no good activity, we are forced at last by death’s final constraint to realize that it has passed away before we knew it was passing. So it is: we are not given a short life but we make it short, and we are not ill-supplied but wasteful of it. Just as when ample and princely wealth falls to a bad owner it is squandered in a moment, but wealth however modest, if entrusted to a good custodian, increases with use, so our lifetime extends for plenty of time for him who knows how to manage it well.

Why do we complain of Nature? She has shown herself kindly; life, if you know how to use it, is long. But one man is gripped by insatiable avarice, another by a laborious diligence in useless tasks. One is soaked in wine, another sluggish with idleness. One man is worn out by political ambition, which is always at the mercy of the judgment of others. Another through hope of merchandise is driven over all lands and all seas by his craving for gain. Some are tormented by a passion for military life, always intent on inflicting danger on others or anxious about danger to themselves. Some are worn out by the voluntary servitude of attendance on the great. Many are kept busy by the pursuit of other men’s fortune or by complaining about their own. Many following no fixed aim, shifting and inconstant and dissatisfied, are plunged by their fickleness into plans that are ever new. Some have no fixed principle by which to direct their course, but Fate takes them by surprise while they are lolling and yawning—so that I surely cannot doubt the truth of that which the greatest of poets said in the form of an oracle: "The part of life we really live is small." For all the rest of existence is not life, but merely time.

Vices beset us and surround us on every side, and they do not permit us to rise anew and lift up our eyes for the discernment of truth, but they keep us down when once they have overwhelmed us and we are chained to lust. They never allow us to return to our true selves.

It takes the whole of life to learn how to live, and—what will perhaps make you wonder more—it takes the whole of life to learn how to die. Many very great men, having laid aside all their encumbrances, having renounced riches, business, and pleasures, have made it their one aim up to the very end of their lives to know how to live; yet many of them have died confessing that they did not yet know—still less can those others know.
