The Project Gutenberg eBook of Either/Or, by Søren Kierkegaard

Title: Either/Or: A Fragment of Life
       Enten - Eller

Author: Søren Kierkegaard (Victor Eremita)

DIAPSALMATA

What is a poet? An unhappy man who in his heart harbors a deep anguish,
but whose lips are so fashioned that the sighs and cries which pass over
them are transformed into ravishing music. His fate is like that of the
unfortunate victims whom the tyrant Phalaris imprisoned in a brazen bull,
and slowly tortured over a steady fire; their cries could not reach the
tyrant's ears so as to strike terror into his heart; when they reached
him they sounded like sweet melody. And men crowd about the poet and say
to him, "Sing for us soon again"--which is as much as to say, "May new
sufferings torment your soul, but may your lips be fashioned as before;
for the cries would only distress us, but the music is dainty." And the
critics come forward and say, "That is perfectly done--just as the rules
of aesthetics require." For it appears that a critic resembles a poet to
a hair; he only lacks the anguish in his heart and the music upon his lips.
I tell you, I would rather be a swineherd, understood by the swine, than
a poet misunderstood by men.

I do not care for anything. I do not care to ride, for the exercise is
too violent. I do not care to walk, for it is too strenuous. I do not
care to lie down, for I should either have to remain lying, and I do not
care to do that, or I should have to get up again, and I do not care to
do that. Summa summarum: I do not care at all.

There are two kinds of people, and only two, and that is the only practical
division of humanity: one kind of people who can sleep, and another kind
who can't.

My sorrow is my castle, which like an eagle's eyrie is built high up on
the mountain peak among the clouds. No one can storm it. From it I fly
down into reality to seize my prey; but I do not remain down there, I
bring my booty home. And this booty is a picture I weave into the
tapestries of my palace. There I live as one dead. I immerse everything
I have experienced in a baptism of forgetfulness unto an eternal
remembrance. Everything finite and accidental is forgotten and erased.
Then I sit like an old man, grey-haired and thoughtful, and explain
picture after picture in a voice as soft as a whisper; and at my side
sits a child and listens and remembers everything with an open, wondering
eye.

The most unhappiest man.
"Marry, and you will regret it; do not marry, and you will also regret it;
marry or do not marry, you will regret it either way. Laugh at the
world's foolishness, you will regret it; weep over it, you will regret
that either; laugh at the world's foolishness or weep over it, you will
regret both. Believe a woman, you will regret it; believe her not, you
will also regret it; believe a woman or believe her not, you will regret
it either way. Hang yourself, you will regret it; do not hang yourself,
and you will regret that too; hang yourself or do not hang yourself,
you will regret it either way. This, gentlemen, is the essence of all
philosophy."

THE ROTATION METHOD

My method does not consist in the change of field, but rather resembles
the true rotation method in changing the crop and the mode of cultivation.
Here we have at once the principle of limitation, the only saving
principle in the world. The more you limit yourself, the more fertile
you become in invention. A prisoner in solitary confinement for life
becomes very inventive, and a spider may furnish him with much
entertainment. One need only hark back to his school days, and one will
surely be convinced that there is no time when one has such a wealth of
ideas as during the prayer period, precisely because one is then obliged
to sit still and keep quiet. The more you limit yourself, the more
fertile you become in invention.
