EITHER/OR

A FRAGMENT OF LIFE

PUBLISHED BY

VICTOR EREMITA

PART I

containing A's Papers

Are passions, then, the pagans of the soul?
Reason alone baptized?

YOUNG

PREFACE

Dear Reader: I wonder if you may not sometimes have felt
inclined to doubt a little the correctness of the familiar philo-
sophic maxim that the external is the internal, and the internal
the external. Perhaps you have cherished in your heart a secret which
you felt in all its joy or pain, was too precious for you to share with
another. Perhaps your life has brought you in contact with some person
of whom you suspected something of the kind was true, although you
were never able to wrest his secret from him either by force or cunning.
Perhaps neither of these presuppositions applies to you and your life,
and yet you are not a stranger to this doubt; it flits across your
mind now and then like a passing shadow. Such a doubt comes and goes, and
no one knows whence it comes, nor whither it goes. For my part I have
always been heretically-minded on this point in philosophy, and have
therefore early accustomed myself, as far as possible, to institute obser-
vations and inquiries concerning it. I have sought guidance from those
authors whose views I shared on this matter; in short, I have done
everything in my power to remedy the deficiency in the philosophical
works.

Gradually the sense of hearing came to be my favorite sense; for just
as the voice is the revelation of the external, incommensurable inward-
ness, so the ear is the instrument by which this inwardness is appre-
hended, hearing is the sense by which it is appropriated. Whenever,
then, I found a contradiction between what I saw and what I heard,
then I found my doubt confirmed, and my enthusiasm for the investiga-
tion stimulated. In the confessional the priest is separated from the
one confessing by a screen; he does not see, he only hears. Gradually as
he listens, he constructs an outward appearance which corresponds to the
voice he hears. Consequently, he experiences no contradiction. It is
otherwise, however, when you hear and see at the same time, and yet
perceive a screen between yourself and the speaker. My researches in this
direction have met with varying degrees of success. Sometimes I have
been favored by fortune, sometimes not, and one needs good fortune to
win results along this road. However, I have never lost my desire to
continue my investigations. More than once I have been almost ready
to regret my perseverance, while occasionally unexpected success has
crowned my efforts. It was such an unexpected bit of luck which in a
very curious manner put me in the possession of the papers which I now
have the honor of offering to the reading public. These papers have
afforded me an insight into the lives of two men, have confirmed my
doubt that the external is not the internal. This was especially true about
one of them. His external mode of life had been in complete contra-
diction to his inner life. The same was true to a certain extent with the
other also, inasmuch as he concealed a more significant inwardness
under a somewhat commonplace exterior.

DIAPSALMATA

ad se ipsum

Grandeur, savoir, renommee,
Amitie, plaisir et bien,
Tout n'est que vent, que fumee:
Pour mieux dire, tout n'est rien.

WHAT is a poet? A poet is an unhappy being whose heart is torn
by secret sufferings, but whose lips are so strangely formed
that when the sighs and the cries escape them, they sound like
beautiful music. His fate is like that of the unfortunate victims whom
the tyrant Phalaris imprisoned in a brazen bull, and slowly tortured over
a steady fire; their cries could not reach the tyrant's ears so as to strike
terror into his heart; when they reached his ears they sounded like
sweet music. And men crowd about the poet and say to him: "Sing for us soon
again"; that is as much as to say: "May new sufferings torment your
soul, but may your lips be formed as before; for the cries would only
frighten us, but the music is delicious." And the critics come, too, and
say: "Quite correct, and so it ought to be, according to the rules of
aesthetics." Now it is understood that a critic resembles a poet to a hair;
he only lacks the suffering in his heart, and the music upon his lips. Lo,
therefore I would rather be a swineherd from Amager, and be under-
stood by the swine, than be a poet and be misunderstood by men.

The first question in the earliest and most compendious instruction
the child receives, is, as everyone knows, this: What will the child have?
The answer is: da-da. And with such reflections life begins, and yet men
deny original sin. And to whom does the child owe its first drubbings,
whom other than the parents?

I prefer to talk with children, for it is still possible to hope that they
may become rational beings. But those who have already become so--
good Lord!

How absurd men are! They never use the liberties they have, they de-
mand those they do not have. They have freedom of thought, they
demand freedom of speech.

I do not care for anything. I do not care to ride, for the exercise is too
violent. I do not care to walk, walking is too strenuous. I do not care to
lie down, for I should either have to remain lying, and I do not care
to do that, or I should have to get up again, and I do not care to do that
either. Summa summarum: I do not care at all.

There are well-known insects which die in the moment of fecunda-
tion. So it is with all joy; life's supreme and richest moment of pleasure
is coupled with death.

THE IMMEDIATE STAGES OF THE EROTIC
OR
THE MUSICAL EROTIC

INSIGNIFICANT INTRODUCTION

From the moment that Mozart's music first filled my soul with
wonder, and I bowed before it in humble admiration, I have
found a dear and grateful occupation in reflecting on how that
happy Greek view of the world which calls the world a cosmos, because
it manifests itself as a harmonious whole, a transparent and tasteful
adornment for the Spirit which works in and through it--how this
happy view finds application in a higher realm, in the world of ideals,
where there is again an overruling wisdom particularly admirable in
joining together those things which belong together: Axel with Val-
borg, Homer with the Trojan War, Raphael with Catholicism, Mozart
with Don Juan. There is a wretched unbelief abroad which seems to
contain much healing power. It deems such a connection accidental, and
sees in it only a lucky conjunction of the different forces in the game of
life. It thinks it an accident that the lovers win one another, accidental
that they love one another; there were a hundred other women with
whom the hero might have been equally happy, and whom he could
have loved as deeply. It thinks that there has been many a poet who
might have become as immortal as Homer, if this splendid subject had
not already been appropriated by him; many a composer who might
have made himself as immortal as Mozart, had the opportunity offered.
This wisdom contains much solace and comfort for all mediocre minds,
since it lends itself to the delusion with which they deceive themselves
and other like-minded souls, that it is a confusion of fate, an error on the
part of the world, that they did not become as famous as the famous.
It is a very easy optimism that is thus encouraged. But for every high-
minded soul, for every optimate who is not so anxious to save himself
in this wretched manner as to lose himself in the contemplation of great-
ness, it is naturally repugnant; while it is a delight to his soul, a sacred
joy, to behold the union of those things which belong together. It is this
union which is fortunate, but not as if it were merely accidental; and
hence, it presupposes two distinct factors, while the accidental involves
merely the inarticulate interjections of a blind fate. It is the realization
of this union which constitutes the fortunate in the historical process,
the divine conjunction of its forces, the high tide of historic time. The
accidental has but one factor; it is accidental that Homer found in
the Trojan War the most distinguished epic subject conceivable. The for-
tunate has two factors: it is fortunate that the most distinguished epic
subject fell to the lot of Homer; here the accent falls as much on Homer
as on the material. It is this profound harmony which reverberates
through every work of art we call classic. And so it is with Mozart; it is
fortunate that the subject, which is perhaps the only strictly musical
subject, in the deeper sense, that life affords, fell to--Mozart.

With his Don Juan Mozart enters the little immortal circle of those
whose names, whose works, time will not forget, because eternity re-
members them. And though it is a matter of indifference, when one has
found entrance there, whether one stands highest or lowest, because in
a certain sense all stand equally high, and though it is childish to dispute
over the first and the last place here, as it is when children quarrel about
the order assigned to them in the church at confirmation, I am still too
much of a child, or rather I am like a young girl in love with Mozart,
and I must have him in first place, cost what it may. And I will appeal
to the parish clerk, and to the clergyman and to the dean and to the
bishop and to the whole consistory, and I will implore and adjure them
to hear my prayer, and I will invoke the whole communion on this mat-
ter, and if they refuse to hear me, if they refuse to grant my childish
wish, I shall cut myself off from society, and renounce all fellowship
with its modes of thought; and I will form a sect which not only gives
Mozart first place, but which absolutely refuses to recognize any artist
other than Mozart; and I shall beg Mozart to forgive me, because his
music did not inspire me to great deeds, but turned me into a fool, who
lost through him the little reason I had, and spent most of my time
in quiet sadness humming what I do not understand, haunting like a
specter day and night what I am not permitted to enter. Immortal
Mozart! Thou, to whom I owe everything; to whom I owe the loss of
my reason, the wonder that caused my soul to tremble, the fear that
gripped my inmost being; thou, to whom I owe it that I did not pass
through life without having been stirred by something. Thou, to whom
I offer thanks that I did not die without having loved, although my
love became unhappy. Is it strange then that I should be more concerned
for Mozart's glorification than for the happiest moment of my life, more
jealous for his immortality than for my own existence? Aye, if he were
taken away, if his name were erased from the memory of men, then
would the last pillar be overthrown, which for me has kept everything
from being hurled together into boundless chaos, into fearful nothing-
ness.

THE ROTATION METHOD

An Essay in the Theory of Social Prudence

STARTING from a principle is affirmed by people of experience to be
a very reasonable procedure; I am willing to humor them, and so
begin with the principle that all men are bores. Surely no one will
prove himself so great a bore as to contradict me in this. This principle
possesses the quality of being in the highest degree repellent, an essential
requirement in the case of negative principles, which are in the last
analysis the principles of all motion. It is not merely repellent, but in-
finitely forbidding; and whoever has this principle back of him cannot
but receive an infinite impetus forward, to help him make new discov-
eries. For if my principle is true, one need only consider how ruinous
boredom is for humanity, and by properly adjusting the intensity of
one's concentration upon this fundamental truth, attain any desired
degree of momentum. Should one wish to attain the maximum mo-
mentum, even to the point of almost endangering the driving power,
one need only say to oneself: Boredom is the root of all evil. Strange that
boredom, in itself so staid and stolid, should have such power to set in
motion. The influence it exerts is altogether magical, except that it is not
the influence of attraction, but of repulsion.

In the case of children, the ruinous character of boredom is universally
acknowledged. Children are always well-behaved as long as they are
enjoying themselves. This is true in the strictest sense; for if they some-
times become unruly in their play, it is because they are already begin-
ning to be bored--boredom is already approaching, though from a
different direction. In choosing a governess one, therefore, takes into
account not only her sobriety, her faithfulness, and her competence, but
also her aesthetic qualifications for amusing the children; and there
would be no hesitancy in dismissing a governess who was lacking in
this respect, even if she had all the other desirable virtues. Here, then,
the principle is clearly acknowledged; but so strange is the way of
the world, so pervasive the influence of habit and boredom, that this is prac-
tically the only case in which the science of aesthetics receives its just
dues. If one were to ask for a divorce because his wife was tiresome, or
demand the abdication of a king because he was boring to look at, or
the banishment of a preacher because he was tiresome to listen to, or
the dismissal of a prime minister, or the execution of a journalist, be-
cause he was terribly tiresome, one would find it impossible to force it
through. What wonder, then, that the world goes from bad to worse,
and that its evils increase more and more, as boredom increases, and
boredom is the root of all evil.

The history of this can be traced from the very beginning of the
world. The gods were bored, and so they created man. Adam was bored
because he was alone, and so Eve was created. Thus boredom entered
the world, and increased in proportion to the increase of population.
Adam was bored alone; then Adam and Eve were bored together; then
Adam and Eve and Cain and Abel were bored en famille; then the
population of the world increased, and the peoples were bored en masse.
To divert themselves they conceived the idea of constructing a tower
high enough to reach the heavens. This idea is itself as boring as the
tower was high, and constitutes a terrible proof of how boredom gained
the upper hand. The nations were scattered over the earth, just as people
now travel abroad, but they continued to be bored. Consider the conse-
quences of this boredom. Humanity fell from its lofty height, first be-
cause of Eve, and then from the Tower of Babel. What was it, on the
other hand, that delayed the fall of Rome, was it not panis and cir-
censes? And is anything being done now? Is anyone concerned about
planning some means of diversion? Quite the contrary, the impending
ruin is being proclaimed. It is proposed to call a constitutional assembly.
Can anything more tiresome be imagined, both for the participants
themselves, and for those who have to hear and read about it? It is pro-
posed to improve the financial condition of the state by practicing
economy. What could be more tiresome? Instead of increasing the na-
tional debt, it is proposed to pay it off. As I understand the political situ-
ation, it would be an easy matter for Denmark to negotiate a loan of
fifteen million dollars. Why not consider this plan? Every once in a
while we hear of a man who is a genius, and therefore neglects to pay
his debts--why should not a nation do the same, if we were all agreed?
Let us then borrow fifteen millions, and let us use the proceeds, not to
pay our debts, but for public entertainment. Let us celebrate the mil-
lennium in a riot of merriment. Let us place boxes everywhere, not, as at
present, for the deposit of money, but for the free distribution of
money. Everything would become gratis; theaters gratis, women of easy virtue
gratis, one would drive to the park gratis, be buried gratis, one's
eulogy would be gratis; I say gratis, for when one always has money at hand,
everything is in a certain sense free. No one should be permitted to own
any property. Only in my own case would there be an exception. I re-
serve to myself securities in the Bank of London to the value of one
hundred dollars a day, partly because I cannot do with less, partly be-
cause the idea is mine, and finally because I may not be able to hit upon
a new idea when the fifteen millions are gone.

DIARY OF THE SEDUCER

Sua passion' predominante
e la giovin principiante

DON GIOVANNI ABIA NO. 4

I CANNOT conceal from myself, scarcely can I master the anxiety
which grips me at this moment, when I decide for my own satisfac-
tion to make a clear and accurate copy of the rough transcript which
I was able at the time to secure only in the greatest haste and with much
disquietude. The situation stands out before me just as alarmingly, but
also as reprehensibly, as it did at that time. Contrary to his custom, he
had not locked his secretary, so its whole content was at my disposal;
but it is futile for me to try to extenuate my behavior by reminding my-
self that I did not open the drawer. One drawer was pulled out. In it
I found a number of loose papers, and on top of them lay a book in broad
quarto, tastefully bound. On the upper side was placed a vignette of
white paper on which he had written in his own hand: Commentarius
perpetuus Nr. 4. Vainly, however, have I tried to make myself believe
that if the face of the book had not been turned up, and if the strange
title had not tempted me, I should not have fallen into temptation, or
I should at least have resisted it. The title itself was strange, not so much
in itself as because of its surroundings. From a hasty glance at the loose
papers I learned that these contained interpretations of erotic situations,
a few hints about one and another relationship, outlines for letters of a
very peculiar character, which I later learned to know in their artisti-
cally perfected, calculated carelessness. When now, after having looked
into the scheming mind of this depraved personality, I recall my situ-
ation; when, with my eye alert for every subtlety, I in thought approach
that drawer, it makes the same impression upon me as it must make
upon a police officer when he enters the room of a forger, opens his be-
longings, and finds in a drawer a number of loose papers, samples of
handwriting; on one there is a piece of tracing, on another a monogram,
on a third a line of reversed writing. It clearly proves to him that he is
on the right track, and his satisfaction over this is mingled with a cer-
tain admiration for the study and industry which is here evidenced.
