Diapsalmata

What is a poet? An unhappy man who in his heart harbors a deep anguish, but whose lips are so fashioned that the moans and cries which pass over them are transformed into ravishing music. His fate is like that of the unfortunate victims whom the tyrant Phalaris imprisoned in a brazen bull, and slowly tortured over a steady fire; their cries could not reach the tyrant’s ears so as to strike terror into his heart; when they reached him they sounded like sweet music. And men crowd about the poet and say to him, "Sing for us soon again"—that is as much as to say, "May new sufferings torment your soul, but may your lips be fashioned as before; for the cries would only distress us, but the music is delicious." And the critics come forward and say, "That is perfectly done—just as the rules of aesthetics demand." To be sure, a critic resembles a poet to a hair; he only lacks the anguish in his heart and the music upon his lips. I tell you, I would rather be a swineherd, understood by the swine, than a poet misunderstood by men.

I do not care for anything. I do not care to ride, for the exercise is too violent. I do not care to walk, it is too strenuous. I do not care to lie down, for I should either have to remain lying, and I do not care to do that, or I should have to get up again, and I do not care to do that either. Summa summarum: I do not care at all.

There is nothing with which every man is so afraid as getting to know how enormously much he is capable of doing and becoming.

The most painful state of being is remembering the future, particularly the one you'll never have.

I divide my time as follows: half the time I sleep, the other half I dream. I never dream when I sleep, for that would be a pity, for sleeping is the highest genius.

My sorrow is my castle, which like an eagle's nest is built high up on the mountain peaks among the clouds. No one can storm it. From it I fly down into reality and seize my prey; but I do not remain down there, I bring my booty home. And this booty is a picture I weave into the tapestries of my palace.

Let others complain that the age is wicked; my complaint is that it is paltry; for it lacks passion. Men’s thoughts are thin and flimsy like lace, they are themselves pitiable like the lacemakers. The thoughts of their hearts are too paltry to be sinful. For a worm it might be regarded as a sin to harbor such thoughts, but not for a man who is formed in the image of God. Their lusts are dull and sluggish, their passions sleepy. They do their duty, these shopkeeping souls, but they clip the coin a little...

What if everything in the world were a misunderstanding, what if laughter were really tears?

I have the courage, I believe, to doubt everything; I have the courage, I believe, to fight with everything; but I have not the courage to know anything, not the courage to possess, to own anything. Most people complain that the world is so prosaic, that life is not like a romance, where opportunities are always so favorable. I complain that life is not like a romance, where one has hard-hearted parents and nixies and trolls to fight, and enchanted princesses to free. What are all such enemies taken together compared with the pale, bloodless, tenacious, nocturnal shapes with which I fight and to which I myself give life and being?
