Diapsalmata

I have just now come from a party where I was its life and soul; witticisms streamed from my lips, everyone laughed and admired me, but I went away — yes, the dash should be as long as the radius of the earth's orbit ——————————— and wanted to shoot myself.

What is a poet? An unhappy man who in his heart harbors a deep anguish, but whose lips are so fashioned that the sighs and cries which pass over them are transformed into ravishing music. His fate is like that of the unfortunate victims whom the tyrant Phalaris imprisoned in a brazen bull, and slowly tortured over a steady fire; their cries could not reach the tyrant’s ears so as to strike terror into his heart; when they reached him they sounded like sweet music. And men crowd about the poet and say to him: “Sing for us soon again” — that is as much as to say: “May new sufferings torment your soul, but may your lips be fashioned as before; for the cries would only distress us, but the music is delicious.”

My life is like an eternal night. What if I were to die? And yet, what if I were to live? There is no meaning in it. My life has no significance. My standpoint is armed neutrality.

Boredom is the root of all evil. It is very curious that boredom, which itself has such a calm and sedate nature, can have such a capacity to initiate motion. The effect of boredom is usually strongest when it ceases to be abstract and becomes concrete.

The Rotation of Crops
People with experience maintain that proceeding from a basic principle is the supposed method of all science. Suppose, then, that we establish the principle that all men are bores. Or is there anyone who would be so boring as to contradict me in this? This principle possesses the quality of being in the highest degree repellent, an essential requirement in the negative.

The method I propose does not consist in changing the soil but, like proper crop rotation, consists in changing the method of cultivation and the kinds of crops. Here we have at once the principle of limitation, the only saving principle in the world. The more you limit yourself, the more fertile you become in invention. A prisoner in solitary confinement for life becomes very inventive, and a spider may furnish him with much entertainment.

To be a Teacher
If real success is to attend the effort to bring a man to a definite position, one must first of all take pains to find him where he is and begin there. This is the secret of the art of helping others. Anyone who has not mastered this is himself deluded when he proposes to help others. In order to help another effectively I must understand more than he—yet first of all surely I must understand what he understands. If I do not know that, my greater understanding will be of no help to him. If, however, I am disposed to plume myself on my greater understanding, it is because I am vain or proud, so that at bottom, instead of benefiting him, I want to be admired.
But all true helping begins with a humbling. The helper must first humble himself under him he would help, and therewith understand that to help does not mean to be a sovereign but to be a servant, that to help does not mean to be ambitious but to be patient, that to help means to endure for the time being the imputation that one is in the wrong and does not understand what the other understands.
