Preface

Not only in the world of commerce but also in the world of ideas our age is putting on a big clearance sale. Everything can be had so dirt cheap that one begins to wonder whether in the end anyone will want to make a bid. Every speculative price-fixer who conscientiously directs attention to the significant march of modern philosophy, every assistant professor, tutor, and student, every crofter and cottager in philosophy, is not content with doubting everything but goes further. Perhaps it would be untimely and ill-timed to ask them where they are going, but surely it is courteous and taken for granted to assume that they have doubted everything, since otherwise it would be queer for them to go further. Having made this motion, they have therefore established all the preliminary conditions for negotiations with philosophy.

But if one were to attempt to grasp that movement of doubt in its interiority, perhaps one would find a difficulty which the doubter would also become aware of if he did not choose to settle the matter by shouting “Forward!” somewhat as a skipper effectively covers up the slowness of the ship’s motion by shouting “Clap on more sail!”; and perhaps this difficulty would cause the doubter to wish that he had not started so early or else had started earlier.

For the present author, in any case, it is by no means easy to doubt. He is therefore obliged to hang back, while the others run on ahead; he is obliged to feel his way, while the others are already at the goal; he is obliged to experience the anxiety and the distress, while the others are already boasting of the result. But at least he has not joined the running, and he has not joined the boasting. He is not a philosopher; he is, poetice et eleganter [poetically and elegantly], a supplementary clerk who neither writes the system nor gives promises of the system, who neither exhausts himself on the system nor binds himself to the system. He writes because to him it is a luxury that becomes the more agreeable and apparent the fewer there are who buy and read what he writes. He can easily foresee his fate in an age when passion has been done away with in favor of science, in an age when an author who wants to have readers must take care to write in such a way that the book can be easily leafed through during the afternoon nap, and take care to be like the polite gardener in the advertisement, who with hat in hand offers his services to the honored public with the recommendation that he has completed his examination at the art-gardening school. He foresees his fate—to be completely ignored; he has a terrible foreboding that his zealous effort will be judged as a case of misdirected energy, and that he will be regarded as a kind of oddity.

Faith is precisely this paradox, that the single individual as the particular is higher than the universal, is justified before it, not as subordinate but superior—yet in such a way, be it observed, that it is the single individual who, after having been subordinate as the particular to the universal, now through the universal becomes the individual who as the particular is superior to the universal, for the fact that the single individual as the particular stands in an absolute relation to the absolute. This position cannot be mediated, for all mediation comes about precisely by virtue of the universal; it is and remains to all eternity a paradox, inaccessible to thought. And yet faith is this paradox—or else (these are the logical deductions which I would beg the reader to have in mind at every point, though it would be too lengthy for me to reiterate them on every occasion)—or else there never has been faith...

Story of Abraham

And God tempted Abraham and said unto him, Abraham! and he said, Here am I. And he said, Take now thy son, thine only son Isaac, whom thou lovest, and get thee into the land of Moriah; and offer him there for a burnt offering upon one of the mountains which I will tell thee of.

It was early in the morning, Abraham arose, saddled his ass, and took two of his young men with him, and Isaac his son; and he clave the wood for the burnt offering, and rose up, and went unto the place of which God had told him. On the third day Abraham lifted up his eyes, and saw the place afar off. Then he said unto his young men, Abide ye here with the ass; and I and the lad will go yonder and worship, and come again to you. And Abraham took the wood of the burnt offering, and laid it upon Isaac his son; and he took the fire in his hand, and a knife; and they went both of them together.

And Isaac spake unto Abraham his father, and said, My father: and he said, Here am I, my son. And he said, Behold the fire and the wood: but where is the lamb for a burnt offering? And Abraham said, My son, God will provide himself a lamb for a burnt offering: so they went both of them together.

And they came to the place which God had told him of; and Abraham built an altar there, and laid the wood in order, and bound Isaac his son, and laid him on the altar upon the wood. And Abraham stretched forth his hand, and took the knife to slay his son.

That was a trial—but Abraham believed. He did not doubt, he did not look about him in anguish, but he knew that it was God who required it, he knew that it was the trial, and he knew that God could still give him Isaac again. He knew that the whole generation of the righteous would be blessed in his seed, he knew that it was God’s promise to him, and he believed it. He did not doubt, he did not look about him in anguish, but he knew that it was God who required it, he knew that it was the trial, and he knew that God could still give him Isaac again.

If Abraham had not had faith, Sarah would probably have died of sorrow, and Abraham, dulled by grief, would not have understood the fulfillment, but would have smiled at it as at a dream. But Abraham had faith, and therefore he remained young; for he who always hopes for the best becomes old, and he who is always prepared for the worst becomes old early, but he who believes preserves an eternal youth. Praise be to that story! For Sarah, though advanced in age, was young enough to desire the pleasure of motherhood, and Abraham, though gray-haired, was young enough to wish to be a father. In an outward respect, the miracle is that it came to pass according to their expectation, but in a deeper sense the miracle of faith is that Abraham and Sarah were young enough to wish, and that faith had preserved their wish and therewith their youth. He accepted the fulfillment of the promise, he accepted it by faith, and it came to pass according to the promise and according to his faith—for Moses smote the rock with his rod, but he did not believe.

Thus there was one who was great by reason of his power, and one who was great by reason of his wisdom, and one who was great by reason of his hope, and one who was great by reason of his love; but Abraham was greater than all, great by that power whose strength is powerlessness, great by that wisdom which is foolishness, great by that hope whose form is madness, great by that love which is hatred of oneself.
