Preface

Not only in the world of commerce but also in the world of ideas our age is putting on a veritable clearance sale. Everything can be had so dirt cheap that one begins to wonder whether in the end anyone will want to make a bid. Every speculative price-fixer who conscientiously directs attention to the significant march of modern science, every Assistant Professor, tutor, and student, every crofter and cottar in philosophy, is not content with doubting everything but “goes further.” It might be untimely and ill-advised to ask where they are going, but surely it is courteous and unobjectionable to regard it as certain that they have doubted everything, since otherwise it would be queer for them to be going further. This preliminary movement they have therefore all of them made, and presumably with such ease that they do not think it necessary to waste a word about the how; for not even he who anxiously and with deep concern sought a little enlightenment in the systems found there any syllable about it, any little hint or secret instruction which might help him with the diet. “But this doubted everything is only the beginning.” I know that. “What the method proposes is nothing less than to begin immediately with the beginning.” I know that too.

But if the beginning is the beginning, it is also the end, and the method is circular. Therefore, if one has doubted everything, one has made a beginning, but also has arrived at the end—and so has no need to go further. This doubt, then, must be the content of the system, and the system must be the system of the doubt. But the system is not the system of the doubt, it is the system of the absolute. In the system everything is true, and nothing is doubtful. How then did the doubt get in? And if it is not in the system, how can it be the beginning? And if it is the beginning, how can one go further? This going further is a very strange business, and I should like to know how it is managed.

Abraham and Isaac

And God tempted Abraham, and said unto him, Abraham: and he said, Behold, here I am.

And he said, Take now thy son, thine only son Isaac, whom thou lovest, and get thee into the land of Moriah; and offer him there for a burnt offering upon one of the mountains which I will tell thee of.

It was early in the morning, Abraham rose early, he saddled his ass, and took two of his young men with him, and Isaac his son, and clave the wood for the burnt offering, and rose up, and went unto the place of which God had told him.

On the third day Abraham lifted up his eyes, and saw the place afar off.

And Abraham said unto his young men, Abide ye here with the ass; and I and the lad will go yonder and worship, and come again to you.

And Abraham took the wood of the burnt offering, and laid it upon Isaac his son; and he took the fire in his hand, and a knife; and they went both of them together.

And Isaac spake unto Abraham his father, and said, My father: and he said, Here am I, my son. And he said, Behold the fire and the wood: but where is the lamb for a burnt offering?

And Abraham said, My son, God will provide himself a lamb for a burnt offering: so they went both of them together.

And they came to the place which God had told him of; and Abraham built an altar there, and laid the wood in order, and bound Isaac his son, and laid him on the altar upon the wood.

And Abraham stretched forth his hand, and took the knife to slay his son.

Problem I: Is there such a thing as a Teleological Suspension of the Ethical?

The ethical as such is the universal, it applies to everyone, which may be expressed from another point of view by saying that it applies every instant. It reposes immanently in itself, it has nothing without itself which is its telos, but is itself telos for everything outside it, and when this has been incorporated by the ethical it can go no further. Conceived immediately as physical and psychical, the particular individual is the individual who has his telos in the universal, and his ethical task is to express himself constantly in it, to abolish his particularity in order to become the universal. As soon as the individual would assert himself in his particularity over against the universal, he sins, and only by recognizing this can he again reconcile himself with the universal. Every time the individual after he has entered the universal feels an impulse to assert himself as the particular, he is in temptation (Anfechtung), and he can labor himself out of this only by abandoning himself as the particular in the universal. If this be the highest thing that can be said of man and of his existence, then the ethical has the same nature as man’s eternal blessedness, which to all eternity and at every instant is his telos, since it would be a contradiction to say that this might be abandoned (i.e. teleologically suspended), seeing that as soon as this is suspended it is forfeited, whereas in other cases what is suspended is not forfeited but is preserved in the higher sphere which is its telos.

If such be the case, then Hegel is right when in his Logic he characterizes the Good and Conscience as the formal, and he is right when in his Philosophy of Right he characterizes Faith as a form of the mind’s abstract subjectivity, as “a lack of true content,” and one should carefully follow his hint not to stop at such a definition of Faith—but to go further. If this is the case, then Hegel is right in characterizing Abraham as a lost soul, a murderer, or at least a man who has missed the mark, because he did not express the universal.

For Faith is this paradox, that the particular is higher than the universal—yet in such a way, be it observed, that the movement repeats itself, and that consequently the individual, after having been in the universal, now as the particular isolates himself as higher than the universal. If this be not faith, then Abraham is lost, then faith has never existed in the world... because it has always existed. For if the ethical (i.e. the moral) is the highest thing, and if nothing incommensurable remains in man in any other way but as the evil (i.e. the particular which has to be expressed in the universal), then one needs no other categories than those which the Greek philosophers possessed or which can be deduced from them. This is the truth which Dean Swift has propounded so convincingly, that there are two kinds of people in the world, the one kind who are always in the right, the other kind who are always in the wrong; for the ethical is the universal, and the particular is the exception.

But faith is precisely this paradox, that the single individual is higher than the universal, that he determines his relation to the universal by his relation to the absolute, not his relation to the absolute by his relation to the universal.

Problem II: Is there such a thing as an Absolute Duty toward God?

The ethical is the universal, and as such it is also the divine. Thus it is right to say that every duty is essentially duty to God; but if no more can be said than this, then it is also said that God is not a separate being, but that the universal is the divine. The duty becomes duty by being referred to God, but in the duty itself I do not enter into relation to God. For example, it is a duty to love one's neighbor. It is a duty by the fact that it is referred to God, but in the duty I enter into relation not to God but to the neighbor I love. If I say then in this connection that it is my duty to love God, I am really saying only that I have a duty to love.

If this is not so, then faith has no place in existence, but faith is then a temptation (Anfechtung), and Abraham is a lost man.

The paradox of faith is this, that there is an interiority which is incommensurable for the outward, an interiority which is not identical with the first but is a new interiority. This must not be overlooked. The knight of faith knows that it is glorious to belong to the universal. He knows that it is beautiful and salutary to be the individual who translates himself into the universal, who edits as it were a pure and elegant edition of himself, as free from errors as possible and which can be read by everyone. He knows that it is refreshing to become intelligible to oneself in the universal so that he understands it and so that every individual who understands him understands the universal in him, and both rejoice in the security of the universal. He knows that it is beautiful to be born as the individual who has the universal as his home, his friendly abiding-place, which at once welcomes him with open arms when he would abide in it. But he knows also that higher than this there is a winding path, a lonely path, steep and narrow; he knows that it is terrible to be born outside the universal, to walk without meeting a single traveler. He knows that it is terrible to be born in solitude, to live in solitude, and to die in solitude.

The Knight of Infinite Resignation vs The Knight of Faith

The knight of infinite resignation makes the movement, but he makes it by his own strength, and essentially he can make it only by his own strength. He can do this, he can find peace and repose in the pain, he can find the eternal consciousness, and he can find the love which is the love of God. But he cannot make the movement of faith, for that he needs the strength of the absurd.

The knight of faith is the only happy man, the heir to the finite, while the knight of resignation is a stranger and a sojourner. But the knight of faith is also the only one who can be happy in the finite, for the knight of resignation can only be happy in the infinite. The knight of faith is the only one who can find joy in the world, while the knight of resignation can only find joy in the renunciation of the world.

So here is the difference: the knight of infinite resignation is a hero, but the knight of faith is a paradox. The knight of infinite resignation is intelligible, but the knight of faith is unintelligible. The knight of infinite resignation can be understood by everyone, but the knight of faith can be understood by no one. The knight of infinite resignation is a tragic hero, but the knight of faith is a knight of faith.
