FEAR AND TREMBLING


                                INTRODUCTION


        Not only in the world of commerce but also in the world of ideas
   our age has arranged a regular clearance-sale. Everything may be had at
   such absurdedly low prices that very soon the question will arise
   whether any one cares to bid. Every waiter with a speculative turn who
   carefully marks the significant progress of modern philosophy, every
   lecturer in philosophy, every tutor, student, every sticker-and‑quitter
   of philosophy—they are not content with doubting everything, but "go
   right on." It might, possibly, be ill‑timed and inopportune to ask them
   whither they are bound; but it is no doubt polite and modest to take it
   for granted that they have doubted everything—else it were a curious
   statement for them to make, that they were proceeding onward. So they
   have, all of them, completed that preliminary operation and, it would
   seem, with such ease that they do not think it necessary to waste a
   word about how they did it. The fact is, not even he who looked
   anxiously and with a troubled spirit for some little point of
   information, ever found one, nor any instruction, nor even any little
   dietetic prescription, as to how one is to accomplish this enormous
   task. "But did not Descartes proceed in this fashion?" Descartes,
   indeed! that venerable, humble, honest thinker whose writings surely no
   one can read without deep emotion—Descartes did what he said, and said
   what he did. Alas, alas! that is a mighty rare thing in our times! But
   Descartes, as he says frequently enough, never uttered doubts
   concerning his faith. . . .

        In our times, as was remarked, no one is content with faith, but
   "goes right on." The question as to whither they are proceeding may be
   a silly question; whereas it is, a sign of urbanity and culture to
   assume that every one has faith, to begin with, for else it were a
   curious statement for them to make, that they are proceeding further.
   In the olden days it was different. Then, faith was a task for a whole
   life‑time because it was held that proficiercy in faith was not to be
   won within a few days or weeks. Hence, when the tried patriarch felt
   his end approaching, after having fought his battles and preserved his
   faith, he was still young enough at heart not to have forgotten the
   fear and trembling which disciplined his youth and which  the mature
   man has under control, but which no one entirely outgrows—except
   insofar as he succeeds in "going on" as early as possible. The goal
   which those venerable men reached at last—at that spot every one
   starts, in our times, in order to "proceed further.". . .



                                 PREPARATION


   There lived a man who, when a child, had heard the beautiful Bible
   story of how God tempted Abraham and how he stood the test, how he
   maintained his faith and, against his expectations, received his son
   back again. As this man grew older he read this same story with ever
   greater admiration; for now life had separated what had been united in
   the reverent simplicity of the child. And the older he grew, the more
   frequently his thoughts reverted to that story. His enthusiasm waxed
   stronger and stronger, and yet the story grew less and less clear to
   him. Finally he forgot everything else in thinking about it, and his
   soul contained but one wish, which was, to behold Abraham; and but one
   longing, which was, to have been witness to that event. His desire was,
   not to see the beautiful lands of the Orient, and not the splendor of
   the Promised Land, and not the reverent couple whose old age the Lord
   had blessed with children, and not the venerable figure of the aged
   patriarch, and not the god‑given vigorous youth of Isaac—it would have
   been the same to him if the event had come to pass on some barren
   heath. But his wish was, to have been with Abraham on the three days'
   journey, when he rode with sorrow before him and with Isaac at his
   side. His wish was, to have been present at the moment when Abraham
   lifted up his eyes and saw Mount Moriah afar off; to have been present
   at the moment when he left his asses behind and wended his way up to
   the mountain alone with Isaac. For the mind of this man was busy, not
   with the delicate conceits of the imagination, but rather with his
   shuddering thought.

   The man we speak of was no thinker, he felt no desire to go beyond his
   faith: it seemed to him the most glorious fate to be remembered as the
   Father of Faith, and a most enviable lot to be possessed of that faith,
   even if no one knew it.

   The man we speak of was no learned exegetist, be did not even
   understand Hebrew—who knows but a knowledge of Hebrew might have helped
   him to understand readily both the story and Abraham.


                                     I.

   And God tempted Abraham and said unto him: take Isaac, thine only son,
   whom thou lovest and go to the land Moriah and sacrifice him there on a
   mountain which I shall show thee.

   It was in the early morning, Abraham arose betimes and had his asses
   saddled. He departed from his tent, and Isaac with him; but Sarah
   looked out of the window after them until they were out of sight.
   Silently they rode for three days; but on the fourth morning Abraham
   said not a word but lifted up his eyes and beheld Mount Moriah in the
   distance. He left his servants behind and, leading Isaac by the hand,
   he approached the mountain. But Abraham said to himself: "I shall
   surely conceal from Isaac whither he is going." He stood still, he laid
   his hand on Isaac's head to bless him, and Isaac bowed down to receive
   his blessing. And Abraham's aspect was fatherly, his glance was mild,
   his speech admonishing. But Isaac understood him not, his soul would
   not rise to him; he embraced Abraham's knees, he besought him at his
   feet, he begged for his young life, for his beautiful hopes, he
   recalled the joy in Abraham's house when he was born, he reminded him
   of the sorrow and the loneliness that would be after him. Then did
   Abraham raise up the youth and lead him by his hand, and his words were
   full of consolation and admonishment. But Isaac understood him not. He
   ascended Mount Moriah, but Isaac understood him not. Then Abraham
   averted his face for a moment; but when Isaac looked again, his
   father's countenance was changed, his glance wild, his aspect terrible,
   he seized Isaac and threw him to the ground and said: "Thou foolish
   lad, believest thou I am thy father? An idol‑worshipper am I. Believest
   thou it is God's cornmand? Nay, but my pleasure." Then Isaac trembled
   and cried out in his fear: "God in heaven, have pity on me, God of
   Abraham, show mercy to me, I have no father on earth, be thou then my
   father!" But Abraham said softly to himself : "Father in heaven, I
   thank thee. Better is it that he believes me inhuman than that he
   should lose his faith in thee."



   When the child is to be weaned, his mother blackens her breast; for it
   were a pity if her breast should look sweet to him when he is not to
   have it. Then the child believes that her breast has changed; but his
   mother is ever the same, her glance is full of love and as tender as
   ever. Happy he who needed not worse means to wean his child!



                                     II.


        It was in the early morning. Abraham arose betimes and embraced
   Sarah, the bride of his old age. And Sarah kissed Isaac who had taken
   the shame from her—Isaac, her pride, her hope for all coming
   generations. Then the twain rode silently along their way, and
   Abraham's glance was fastened on the ground before him; until on the
   fourth day, when he lifted up his eyes and beheld Mount Moriah in the
   distance; but then his eyes again sought the ground. Without a word he
   put the fagots in order and bound Isaac, and without a word he
   unsheathed his knife. Then he beheld the ram God had chosen, and
   sacrificed him, and wended his way home. . . . From that day on Abraham
   grew old. He could not forget that God had required this of him. Isaac
   flourished as before; but Abraham's eye was darkened, he saw happiness
   no more.


   When the child has grown and is to be weaned, his mother will in
   maidenly fashion conceal her breast. Then the child has a mother no
   longer. Happy the child who lost not his mother in any other sense!



                                    III.


   It was in the early morning. Abraham arose betimes he kissed Sarah, the
   young mother, and Sarah kissed Isaac, her joy, her delight for all
   times. And Abraham rode on his way, lost in thought—he was thinking of
   Hagar and her son whom he had driven out into the wilderness. He
   ascended Mount Moriah and he drew the knife.

   It was a calm evening when Abraham rode out alone, and he rode to Mount
   Moriah. There he cast himself down on his face and prayed to God to
   forgive him his sin in that he had been about to sacrifice his son
   Isaac, and in that the father had forgotten his duty toward his son.
   And yet oftener he rode on his lonely way, but he found no rest. He
   could not grasp that it was a sin that he had wanted to sacrifice to
   God his most precious possession, him for whom he would most gladly
   have died many times. But, if it was a sin, if he had not loved Isaac
   thus, then could he not grasp the possbility that he could be forgiven
   : for what sin more terrible ?



   When the child is to he weaned, the mother is not without sorrow that
   she and her child are to be separated more and more, that the child who
   had first lain under her heart, and afterwards at any rate rested at
   her breast, is to be so near to her no more. So they sorrow together
   for that brief while. Happy he who kept his child so near to him and
   needed not to sorrow more!



                                     IV.


   It was in the early morning. All was ready for the journey in the house
   of Abraham. He bade farewell to Sarah; and Eliezer, his faithful
   servant, accompanied him along the way for a little while. They rode
   together in peace, Abraham and Isaac, until they came to Mount Moriah.
   And Abraham prepared everything for the sacrifice, calmly and mildly;
   but when his father turned aside in order to unsheath his knife, Isaac
   saw that Abraham's left hand was knit in despair and that a trembling
   shook his frame—but Abraham drew forth the knife.

   Then they returned home again, and Sarah hastened to meet them; but
   Isaac had lost his faith, No one in all the world ever said a word
   about this, nor did Isaac speak to any man concerning what he had seen,
   and Abraham suspected not that any one had seen it.

        When the child is to be weaned, his mother has the stronger food
   ready lest the child perish. Happy he who has in readiness this
   stronger food!



   Thus, and in many similar ways, thought the man whom I have mentioned
   about this event. And every time he returned, after a pilgrimage to
   Mount Moriah, he sank down in weariness, folding his hands and saying:
   "No one, in truth, was great as was Abraham, and who can understand
   him?"




                           A PANEGYRIC ON ABRAHAM


     If a consciousness of the eternal were not implanted in man; if the
   basis of all that exists were but a confusedly fermenting element
   which, convulsed by obscure passions, Produced all, both the great and
   the insignificant; if under everything there lay a bottomless void
   never to be filled what else were life but despair? If it were thus,
   and if there were no sacred bonds between man and man; if one
   generation arose after another, as in the forest the leaves of one
   season succeed the leaves of another, or like the songs of birds which
   are taken up one after another; if the generations of man passed
   through the world like a ship passing through the sea and the wind over
   the desert—a fruitless and a vain thing; if eternal oblivion were ever
   greedily watching for its prey and there existed no power strong enough
   to wrest it from its clutches—how empty were life then, and how dismal!
   And therefore it is not thus; but, just as God created man and woman,
   he likewise called into being the hero and the poet or orator. The
   latter cannot perform the deeds of the hero—he can only admire and love
   him and rejoice in him. And yet he also is happy and not less so; for
   the hero is, as it were, his better self with which he has fallen in
   love, and he is glad he is not himself the hero, so that his love can
   express itself in admiration.

   The poet is the genius of memory, and does nothing but recall what has
   been done, can do nothing but admire what has been done. He adds
   nothing of his own, but he is Jealous of what has been entrusted to
   him. He obeys the choice of his own heart; but once he has found what
   he has been seeking, he visits every man's door with his song and with
   his speech, so that all may admire the hero as he does, and be proud of
   the hero as he is. This is his achievement, his humble work, this is
   his faithful service in the house of the hero. If thus, faithful to his
   love, he battles day and night against the guile of oblivion which
   wishes to lure the hero from him, then has he accomplished his task,
   then is he gathered to his hero who loves him as faithfully; for the
   poet is as it were the hero's better self, unsubstantial, to be sure,
   like a mere memory, but also transfigured as is a memory. Therefore
   shall no one be forgotten who has done great deeds; and even if there
   be delay, even if the cloud of misunderstanding obscure the hero from
   our vision, still his lover will come some time; and the more time has
   passed, the more faithfully will he cleave to him.

     No, no one shall be forgotten who was great in this world. But each
   hero was great in his own way, and each one was eminent in proportion
   to the great things he loved. For he who loved himself became great
   through himself, and he who loved others became great through his
   devotion, but he who loved God became greater than all of these.
   Everyone of them shall be remembered, but each one became great in
   proportion to his trust. One became great by the possible; another, by
   hoping for the eternal; hoped for the impossible, he became greater
   than all of these. Every one shall be remembered; but each one was
   great in proportion to the power with which he strove. For he who
   strove with the world became great by overcoming himself; but he who
   strove with God, he became the greatest of them all. Thus there have
   been struggles in the world, man against man, one against a thousand;
   but he who struggled with God, he became greatest of them all. Thus
   there was fighting on this earth, and there was he who conquered
   everything by his strength, and there was he who conquered God by his
   weakness. There was he who, trusting in himself, gained all; and there
   was he who, trusting in his strength sacrificed everything; but he who
   believed in God was greater than all of these. There was he who was
   great through his strength, and he who was great through his wisdom,
   and he who was great through his hopes, and he who was great through
   his love; but Abraham was greater than all of these—great through the
   strength whose power is weakness, great through the wisdom whose secret
   is folly, great through the hope whose expression is madness, great
   through the love which is hatred of one's self.

   Through the urging of his faith Abraham left the land of his
   forefathers and became a stranger in the land of promise. He left one
   thing behind and took one thing along: he left his worldly wisdom
   behind and took with him faith. For else he would not have left the
   land of his fathers. but would have thought it an unreasonable demand.
   Through his faith he came to be a stranger in the land of promise,
   where there was nothing to remind him of all that had been dear to him,
   but where everything by its newness tempted his soul to longing. And
   yet was he God's chosen, he in whom the Lord was well pleased! Indeed,
   had he been one cast off, one thrust out of God's mercy, then might he
   have comprehended it; but now it seemed like a mockery of him and of
   his faith. There have been others who lived in exile from the
   fatherland which they loved. They are not forgotten, nor is the song of
   lament forgotten in which they mournfully sought and found what they
   had lost. Of Abraham there exists no song of lamentation. It is human
   to complain, it is human to weep with the weeping; but it is greater to
   believe, and more blessed to consider him who has faith.

   Through his faith Abraham received the promise that in his seed were to
   be blessed all races of mankind. Time passed, there was still the
   possibility of it, and Abraharn had faith. Another man there was who
   also lived in hopes. Time passed, the evening of his life was
   approaching; neither was he paltry enough to have forgotten his hopes:
   neither shall he be forgotten by us! Then he sorrowed, and his sorrow
   did not deceive him, as life had done, but gave him all it could; for
   in the sweetness of sorrow he became possessed of his disappointed
   hopes. It is human to sorrow, it is human to sorrow with the sorrowing;
   but it is greater to have faith, and more blessed to consider him who
   has faith.

        No song of lamentation has come down to us from Abraham. He did
   not sadly count the days as time passed; he did not look at Sarah with
   suspicious eyes, whether she was becoming old; he did not stop the
   sun's course lest Sarah should grow old and his hope with her; he did
   not lull her with his songs of lamentation. Abraham grew old, and Sarah
   became a laughing‑stock to the people; and yet was he God's chosen, and
   heir to the promise that in his seed were to be blessed all races of
   mankind. Were it, then, not better if he had not been God's chosen? For
   what is it to be God's chosen? Is it to have denied to one in one's
   youth all the wishes of youth in order to have them fulfilled after
   great labor in old age?

   But Abraham had faith and steadfastly lived in hope. Had Abraham been
   less firm in his trust, then would he have given up that hope. He would
   have said to God: "So it is, perchance, not Thy will, after all, that
   this shall come to pass. I shall surrender my hope. It was my only one,
   it was my bliss. I am sincere, I conceal no secret grudge for that Thou
   didst deny it to me." He would not have remained forgotten, his example
   would have saved many a one; but he would not have become the Father of
   Faith. For it is great to surrender one's hope, but greater still to
   abide by it steadfastly after having surrendered it; for it is great to
   seize hold of the eternal hope, but greater till to abide steadfastly
   by one's worldly hopes after having rendered them.

     Then came the fulness of time. If Abraham had not had faith, then
   Sarah would probably have died of sorrow, and Abraham, dulled by his
   grief, would not have understood the fulfilment, but would have smiled
   about it as a dream of his youth.  But Abraham had faith, and therefore
   he remained young; for he who always hopes for the best, him life will
   deceive, and he will grow old; and he who is always prepared for the
   worst, he will soon age; but he who has faith, he will preserve eternal
   youth. Praise, therefore, be to this story! For Sarah, though advanced
   in age, was young enough to wish for the pleasures of a mother, and
   Abraham, though grey of hair, was young enough to wish to become a
   father. In a superficial sense it may be considered miraculous that
   what they wished for came to pass, but in a deeper sense the miracle of
   faith is to be seen in Abraham's and Sarah's being young enough to
   wish, and their faith having preserved their wish and therewith their
   youth. The promise he had received was fulfilled, and he accepted it in
   faith, and it came to pass according to the promise and his faith;
   whereas Moses smote the rock with his staff but believed not.

   There was joy in Abraham's house when Sarah celebrated the day of her
   Golden Wedding. But it was not to remain thus; for once more was
   Abraham to be tempted. He had struggled with that cunning power to
   which nothing is impossible, with that ever watchful enemy who never
   sleeps, with that old man who outlives all—he had struggled with Time
   and had preserved his faith. And now all the terror of that fight was
   concentrated in one moment. "And God tempted Abraham, saying to him:
   take now thine only son Isaac, whom thou lovest, and get thee into the
   land of Moriah; and offer him there for a burnt offering upon one of
   the mountains which I will tell thee of.

   All was lost, then, and more terribly than if a son had never been
   given him! The Lord had only mocked Abraham, then! Miraculously he had
   realized the unreasonable hopes of Abraham; and now he wished to take
   away what be had given. A foolish hope it had been, but Abraham had not
   laughed when the promise had been made him. Now all was lost—the
   trusting hope of seventy years, the brief joy at the fulfilment of his
   hopes. Who, then, is he that snatches away the old man's staff, who
   that demands that he himself shall break it in two? Who is he that
   renders disconsolate the grey hair of old age, who is he that demands
   that he himself shall do it? Is there no pity for the venerable old
   man, and none for the innocent child? And yet was Abraham God's chosen
   one, and yet was it the Lord that tempted him. And now all was to be
   lost I The glorious remembrance of him by a whole race, the promise of
   Abraham's seed‑all that was but a whim, a passing fancy of the Lord,
   which Abraham was now to destroy forever! That glorious treasure, as
   old as the faith in Abraham's heart, and many, many years older than
   Isaac, the fruit of Abraham's life, sanctified by prayers, matured in
   struggles—the blessing on the lips of Abraham: this fruit was now to be
   plucked before the appointed time, and to remain without significance;
   for of what significance were it if Isaac was to be sacrificed? That
   sad and yet blessed hour when Abraham was to take leave f rom all that
   was dear to him, the hour when he would once more lift up his venerable
   head, when his face would shine like the countenance of the Lord, the
   hour when he would collect his whole soul for a blessing strong enough
   to render Isaac blessed all the days, of his life‑that hour was not to
   come! He was to say farewell to Isaac, to be sure, but in such wise
   that he himself was to remain behind; death was to part them, but in
   such wise that Isaac was to die. The old man was not in happiness to
   lay his hand on Isaac's head when the hour of death came, but, tired of
   life, to lay violent hands on Isaac. And it was God who tempted him.
   Woe, woe to the messenger who would have come before Abraham with such
   a command! Who would have dared to be the messenger of such dread
   tidings? But it was God that tempted Abraham.

   But Abraham had faith, and had faith for this life. Indeed, had his
   faith been but concerning the life to come, then might he more easily
   have cast away all, in order to hasten out of this world which was not
   his. . . .

   But Abraham had faith and doubted not, but trusted that the improbable
   would come to pass. If Abraham had doubted, when standing on Mount
   Moriah; if he had looked about him in perplexity; if he had accidentally
   discovered the ram before drawing his knife; if God had permitted him to
   sacrifice it instead of Isaac—then would he have returned home, and all
   would have been as before, he would have had Sarah and would have kept
   Isaac; and yet how different all would have been! For then had his return
   been a flight, his salvation an accident, his reward disgrace, his
   future, perchance, perdition.
