The most common form of despair is not being who you are.
Life can only be understood backwards; but it must be lived forwards.
People demand freedom of speech as a compensation for the freedom of thought which they seldom use.
There are two ways to be fooled. One is to believe what isn't true; the other is to refuse to believe what is true.
Anxiety is the dizziness of freedom.
The thing is to find a truth which is true for me, to find the idea for which I can live and die.
Truth is subjectivity.

From "Fear and Trembling":
Faith is precisely this paradox, that the single individual is higher than the universal.
If there were no eternal consciousness in a man, if at the foundation of all there lay only a wildly seething power which writhing with obscure passions produced everything that is great and everything that is insignificant, if a bottomless void never satiated lay hidden beneath all--what then would life be but despair?

From "The Sickness Unto Death":
The formula that describes the state of the self when despair is completely rooted out is this: in relating itself to itself and in willing to be itself, the self rests transparently in the power that established it.
Despair is the Sickness unto Death.

From "Either/Or":
Listen to the cry of a woman in labor at the hour of giving birth — look at the dying man’s struggle at his last extremity, and then tell me whether something that begins and ends thus could be intended for enjoyment.
I see it all perfectly; there are two possible situations — one can either do this or that. My honest opinion and my friendly advice is this: do it or do not do it — you will regret both.

From "Works of Love":
Love is the expression of the one who loves, not of the one who is loved. Those who think they can love only the people they prefer do not love at all. Love discovers truths about individuals that others cannot see.

On The Crowd:
The crowd is untruth. There is therefore no more dangerous and no more significant attack on the truth than the attempt to get the crowd on one's side.
A crowd in its very concept is the untruth, by reason of the fact that it renders the individual completely impenitent and irresponsible, or at least weakens his sense of responsibility by reducing it to a fraction.

On Subjectivity:
Objectively, emphasis is on the what; subjectively, emphasis is on the how.
Christianity is spirit, spirit is inwardness, inwardness is subjectivity, subjectivity is essentially passion, and at its maximum an infinite, personal, passionate interest in one’s eternal happiness.

On Boredom:
Boredom is the root of all evil - the despairing refusal to be oneself.
The gods were bored, and so they created man. Adam was bored because he was alone, and so Eve was created. Thus boredom entered the world, and increased in proportion to the increase of population. Adam was bored alone; then Adam and Eve were bored together; then Adam and Eve and Cain and Abel were bored en famille; then the population of the world increased, and the peoples were bored en masse.
