Preface
Propounding, though not in a dogmatic form, this pamphlet is merely a piece of make-believe.

Chapter I: A Project of Thought
A. How far does the Truth admit of being learned?
This question was proposed by Socrates in the Meno. "But can you tell me, Socrates, whether virtue is acquired by teaching or by practice; or if neither by teaching nor practice, then whether it comes to man by nature, or in what other way?"

Socrates' answer is the doctrine of Recollection. The truth is not introduced into the individual from without, but was within him. He has been in possession of it from the beginning, but has forgotten it. The teacher is merely an occasion, a midwife who helps the learner deliver the truth he already possesses. In the Socratic view, the moment of learning is accidental; it vanishes as soon as the truth is realized.

Now, let us assume that the Socratic view is incorrect. If the learner is to acquire the Truth, the Teacher must bring it to him; and not only so, but he must also bring him the condition for understanding it. For if the learner were in his own person in possession of the condition for understanding the Truth, he would need only to be reminded of it. But if he is not in possession of the condition, then the Teacher must give him the condition along with the Truth.

But one who gives the learner not only the Truth, but also the condition for understanding it, is more than a teacher. All instruction depends upon the presence, in the last analysis, of the requisite condition; if this is lacking, the teacher can do nothing. But if the Teacher is to give the condition, he must be God.

The Moment.
In the Socratic view, the moment had no decisive significance. But in our hypothesis, the moment is of unique and decisive significance. It is the moment in time when the Eternal enters into time. It is the Fullness of Time.

The Disciple at Second Hand.
Can a disciple at second hand (one who learns from a contemporary disciple) receive the condition? No. He can receive the historical information, but the condition must be given by the God himself. Thus, there is no essential difference between the contemporary disciple and the disciple at second hand. Both must receive the condition directly from the God in the Moment. This is the equality of faith.
