The present age is one of understanding, of reflection, devoid of passion, an age which flies into enthusiasm for a moment only to decline back into indolence.

If I were to wish for anything, I should not wish for wealth and power, but for the passionate sense of the potential, for the eye which, ever young and ardent, sees the possible. Pleasure disappoints, possibility never. And what wine is so sparkling, what so fragrant, what so intoxicating, as possibility!

To cheat oneself out of love is the most terrible deception; it is an eternal loss for which there is no reparation, either in time or in eternity.

People understand me so poorly that they don't even understand my complaint about them not understanding me.

The most common form of despair is not being who you are.

Anxiety is the dizziness of freedom.

Life can only be understood backwards; but it must be lived forwards.

The function of prayer is not to influence God, but rather to change the nature of the one who prays.

There are two ways to be fooled. One is to believe what isn't true; the other is to refuse to believe what is true.

What is a poet? An unhappy man who hides deep anguish in his heart, but whose lips are so formed that when the sigh and cry pass through them, it sounds like lovely music.

Face the facts of being what you are, for that is what changes what you are.

It is perfectly true, as philosophers say, that life must be understood backwards. But they forget the other proposition, that it must be lived forwards.

Far from idleness being the root of all evil, it is rather the only true good.

The tyrant dies and his rule is over, the martyr dies and his rule begins.

Deep within every human being there still lives the anxiety over the possibility of being alone in the world, forgotten by God, overlooked among the millions and millions in this enormous household.

To date, I have been able to make no use of my life except to fast and pray and endure my suffering.

I feel as if I were a piece in a game of chess when my opponent says of it: That piece cannot be moved.

What if everything in the world were a misunderstanding, what if laughter were really tears?

Truth is subjectivity.

I have just now come from a party where I was its life and soul; witticisms streamed from my lips, everyone laughed and admired me, but I went away — yes, the dash should be as long as the radius of the earth's orbit ——————————— and wanted to shoot myself.

The self is a relation that relates itself to itself or is the relation's relating itself to itself in the relation; the self is not the relation but that the relation relates itself to itself.

Purity of heart is to will one thing.

It is better to be lost in the crowd than to be lost in one's own solitude.

My life is like an eternal night...

Do it or do not do it — you will regret both.
