The Sickness Unto Death

by

Søren Kierkegaard

PREFACE

For many the title of this book will no doubt seem somewhat strange; and since the
book itself, though in a certain sense it consists of "upbuilding discourses," yet in another
sense does not seem to fit the category of what is commonly understood by this term, it
might not be amiss to preface it with a few words. The title: "The Sickness Unto Death"
is taken from the Gospel, and the book itself is a Christian exposition, designed for
edification and awakening, which presupposes the Christian point of view as known and
acknowledged.

The sickness unto death is despair.

But is despair a sickness? And if so, is it a sickness unto death?

It is indeed a sickness, but not a physical one. It is a sickness of the spirit. And if it is a
sickness unto death, it must be because it leads to death. But what is death? Is it merely
the cessation of biological life? No, for the Christian, death is by no means the end of all.
For the Christian, there is a life after death, an eternal life. So if despair is the sickness
unto death, it must be because it leads to something worse than physical death, namely,
eternal death.

Despair is the sickness unto death because it is a sickness of the self, and the self is the
spirit. To be in despair is to be unable to die, in the sense that the sickness does not lead
to the cessation of existence, but rather to the eternal torment of dying without ever
being able to die.

The Torment of Despair

The torment of despair is precisely this inability to die. It is like the situation of a man
who lies sick with a mortal disease and cannot die. He is sick unto death, but he cannot
die. So it is with despair. The despairing man is sick unto death, but he cannot die. He is
consumed by a fire that does not consume, gnawed by a worm that does not die.

This is the sickness unto death. And yet, there is hope. For just as the sickness is unto
death, so is the cure unto life. The cure for despair is faith. Faith is the condition in which
the self, in relating itself to its own self and willing to be itself, is grounded transparently
in the Power which posited it.

So let us examine this sickness, this despair, in order that we may understand it and, by
the grace of God, find the cure.

I. The Sickness Unto Death is Despair.

A. Despair is a Sickness of the Spirit.

Man is spirit. But what is spirit? Spirit is the self. But what is the self? The self is a
relation which relates itself to its own self, or it is that in the relation [which accounts
for it] that the relation relates itself to its own self; the self is not the relation but [consists
in the fact] that the relation relates itself to its own self. Man is a synthesis of the infinite
and the finite, of the temporal and the eternal, of freedom and necessity, in short it is a
synthesis. A synthesis is a relation between two factors. So regarded, man is not yet a
self.

In the relation between two, the relation is the third term as a negative unity, and the
two relate themselves to the relation, and in the relation to the relation; such a relation
is that between soul and body, when man is regarded as soul. If, on the contrary, the
relation relates itself to its own self, the relation is then the positive third term, and this is
the self.

Such a relation which relates itself to its own self (that is to say, a self) must either have
constituted itself or have been constituted by another.

If this relation which relates itself to its own self is constituted by another, the relation
doubtless is the third term, but this relation (the third term) is in turn a relation relating
itself to that which constituted the whole relation.

Such a derived, constituted, relation is the human self, a relation which relates itself to
its own self, and in relating itself to its own self relates itself to another. Hence it is that
there can be two forms of despair in the strict sense, so far as the self alone is concerned:
either not to will to be oneself, or the despair to will to be oneself.

The Possibility of Despair

The possibility of this sickness is man's advantage over the beast, and this advantage
distinguishes him far more essentially than the erect posture, for it implies the infinite
erectness or loftiness of being spirit. The possibility of this sickness is man's advantage
over the beast; to be aware of this sickness is the Christian's advantage over the natural
man; to be cured of this sickness is the Christian's blessedness.

So then it is an infinite advantage to be able to despair; and yet it is not only the greatest
misfortune and misery to be in despair; no, it is perdition. Ordinarily the relation
between the tree and the fruit corresponds to the relation between the possibility and
the actuality; if the possibility is good, so is the actuality; if the possibility is bad, so is the
actuality. Here it is not so. The possibility of this sickness is man's advantage over the
beast; but the sickness itself is perdition.

Despair is the disrelationship in a relation which relates itself to itself. But the synthesis is
not the disrelationship, it is merely the possibility, or, in the synthesis is comprised the
possibility of the disrelationship. If the synthesis were the disrelationship, there would
be no such thing as despair, for despair would then be something inherent in human
nature as such, that is, it would not be despair; it would be something that happened to
a man, something he suffered, like a disease into which he had fallen, or like death
which is the lot of all. No, despairing lies in the man himself.

The Universality of Despair

Is despair rare? No, it is the most common sickness. It is not something that attacks
only the few; it is a sickness that every human being has in some form or other. There is
no human being who does not have a little despair in him, who does not harbor a secret
unrest, an inner strife, a disharmony, an anxiety about an unknown something or a
something he does not even dare to know, an anxiety about some possibility in existence
or about himself.

This universality of despair is not merely a statistical fact; it is grounded in the very
nature of man as a synthesis. For as long as the synthesis is not complete, as long as the
self has not found its rest in God, there will be despair.

Forms of Despair

Despair can take many forms. There is the despair of not willing to be oneself, the
despair of weakness. This is the despair of the man who tries to escape from himself,
who tries to be someone else, who tries to lose himself in the crowd, in distractions, in
pleasure. He does not want to be the self that he is; he wants to be another.

Then there is the despair of willing to be oneself, the despair of defiance. This is the
despair of the man who wants to be himself in spite of everything, who wants to create
himself, to be the master of his own destiny. He refuses to acknowledge his
dependence on God; he wants to stand alone.

Both forms of despair are forms of the sickness unto death. For both lead away from
life, away from God.

The Cure

The cure for despair is faith. Faith is the condition in which the self, in relating itself to
its own self and willing to be itself, is grounded transparently in the Power which
posited it. This means that the self acknowledges its dependence on God, accepts itself
as a gift from God, and wills to be the self that God intended it to be.

In faith, the self finds rest. It no longer tries to escape from itself, nor does it try to create
itself. It accepts itself as it is, with all its limitations and imperfections, and trusts in
God's grace.

This is the cure for the sickness unto death. This is the way to life eternal.

[Excerpts and Summary based on general knowledge of the text]
