The Sickness Unto Death

Preface

The form of this exposition is such that it might seem to strictly disciplined scientists as if it were too loose to be scientific, and to others as if it were too scientific to be edifying. As to the first objection, I have nothing to say; as to the second, I am of the opinion that if it is too scientific to be edifying, then the fault lies with the reader, who has not been willing to be edified, or with the author, who has not known how to communicate the edifying scientifically.

Part First: The Sickness Unto Death is Despair

A. That Despair is the Sickness Unto Death

1. Despair is a Sickness in the Spirit, in the Self, and so it may have a Triple Form: in Despair at not being Conscious of having a Self (Despair Improperly so called); in Despair at not willing to be Oneself; in Despair at willing to be Oneself.

Man is spirit. But what is spirit? Spirit is the self. But what is the self? The self is a relation which relates itself to its own self, or it is that in the relation [which accounts for it] that the relation relates itself to its own self; the self is not the relation but [consists in the fact] that the relation relates itself to its own self. Man is a synthesis of the infinite and the finite, of the temporal and the eternal, of freedom and necessity, in short it is a synthesis. A synthesis is a relation between two factors. So regarded, man is not yet a self.

In the relation between two, the relation is the third term as a negative unity, and the two relate themselves to the relation, and in the relation to the relation; such a relation is that between soul and body, when man is regarded as soul. But if on the contrary the relation relates itself to its own self, the relation is then the positive third term, and this is the self.

Such a relation which relates itself to its own self (that is to say, a self) must either have constituted itself or have been constituted by another.

If this relation which relates itself to its own self is constituted by another, the relation doubtless is the third term, but this relation (the third term) is in turn a relation relating itself to that which constituted the whole relation.

Such a derived, constituted, relation is the human self, a relation which relates itself to its own self, and in relating itself to its own self relates itself to another. Hence it is that there can be two forms of despair properly so called. If the human self had constituted itself, there could be only one form: not to will to be oneself, to will to get rid of oneself, but there could be no question of despairing over willing to be oneself. This formula, however, is the expression for the dependence of the relation (the self), the expression for the inability of the self to arrive at or to be in equilibrium and rest in itself, but only, in relating itself to its own self, by relating itself to that which constituted the whole relation.

Despair is the sickness unto death.

2. The Possibility and Actuality of Despair

Is despair an advantage or a defect? It is pure dialectic, it is both. If one were to stick to the abstract idea of despair, without thinking of any concrete despairer, one might say that it is an immense advantage. The possibility of this sickness is man's advantage over the beast, and this advantage distinguishes him far more essentially than the erect posture, for it implies the infinite erectness or loftiness of being spirit. The possibility of this sickness is man's advantage over the beast; to be aware of this sickness is the Christian's advantage over the natural man; to be cured of this sickness is the Christian's blessedness.

B. The Universality of this Sickness (Despair)

...There is not one single living human being who does not despair a little, who does not secretly harbor a dread, an inner strife, a disharmony, an anxiety about an unknown something or a something he does not even dare to know, an anxiety about some possibility in existence or an anxiety about himself, so that, just as the physician speaks of going about with an illness in the body, he walks about with a sickness, carries about a sickness of the spirit which signals its presence at rare intervals in and through an anxiety he cannot explain.
