The Sickness Unto Death is Despair.

A. That Despair is the Sickness Unto Death.

1. Despair is a Sickness in the Spirit, in the Self, and so it may have a threefold form: in Despair at not being conscious of having a Self (Despair improperly so called); in Despair at not willing to be oneself; in Despair at willing to be oneself.

Man is spirit. But what is spirit? Spirit is the self. But what is the self? The self is a relation which relates itself to its own self, or it is that in the relation [which accounts for it] that the relation relates itself to its own self; the self is not the relation but [consists in the fact] that the relation relates itself to its own self. Man is a synthesis of the infinite and the finite, of the temporal and the eternal, of freedom and necessity, in short it is a synthesis. A synthesis is a relation between two factors. So regarded, man is not yet a self.

In the relation between two, the relation is the third term as a negative unity, and the two relate themselves to the relation, and in the relation to the relation; such a relation is that between soul and body, when man is regarded as soul. But if the relation relates itself to its own self, the relation is then the positive third term, and this is the self.

Such a relation which relates itself to its own self (that is to say, a self) must either have constituted itself or have been constituted by another. If this relation which relates itself to its own self is constituted by another, the relation doubtless is the third term, but this relation (the third term) is in turn a relation relating itself to that which constituted the whole relation. Such a derived, constituted, relation is the human self, a relation which relates itself to its own self, and in relating itself to its own self relates itself to another. This explains why there can be two forms of despair in the strict sense. If the human self had constituted itself, there could be a question only of one form: not willing to be one’s own self, but there could be no question of despair at willing to be one’s own self. This second formula is the expression for the dependence of the relation (the self), the expression for the inability of the self to arrive at or to be in equilibrium and rest by itself, but only, in relating itself to its own self, by relating itself to that which has constituted it.

The possibility of this sickness is man’s advantage over the beast, and this advantage distinguishes him far more essentially than the erect posture, for it implies the infinite erectness or loftiness of being spirit. The possibility of this sickness is man’s advantage over the beast; to be aware of this sickness is the Christian’s advantage over the natural man; to be cured of this sickness is the Christian’s blessedness.
