The Sickness Unto Death

Introduction

Man is spirit. But what is spirit? Spirit is the self. But what is the
self? The self is a relation which relates itself to its own self, or
it is that in the relation [which accounts for it] that the relation
relates itself to its own self; the self is not the relation but [consists
in the fact] that the relation relates itself to its own self. Man is a
synthesis of the infinite and the finite, of the temporal and the
eternal, of freedom and necessity, in short it is a synthesis. A
synthesis is a relation between two factors. So regarded, man is not yet
a self.

In the relation between two, the relation is the third term as a negative
unity, and the two relate themselves to the relation, and in the relation
to the relation; such a relation is that between soul and body, when man
is regarded as soul. But if, on the contrary, the relation relates
itself to its own self, the relation is then the positive third term, and
this is the self.

Such a relation which relates itself to its own self (that is to say, a
self) must either have constituted itself or have been constituted by
another.

If this relation which relates itself to its own self is constituted by
another, the relation doubtless is the third term, but this relation (the
third term) is in turn a relation relating itself to that which
constituted the whole relation.

Such a derived, constituted, relation is the human self, a relation which
relates itself to its own self, and in relating itself to its own self
relates itself to another. Hence it is that there can be two forms of
despair properly so called. If the human self had constituted itself,
there could be only one form: not to will to be oneself, to will to do
away with oneself, but there could not be the form: in despair to will to
be oneself. This second formula is the expression of the inability of the
self to arrive at or to be in equilibrium and rest by itself, but only by
relating itself to that which constituted it.

Despair is the Sickness unto Death.

1. That Despair is the Sickness unto Death

The concept of the sickness unto death must be understood in a peculiar
sense. Literally it means a sickness the end and outcome of which is
death. Thus one speaks of a mortal sickness as synonymous with a sickness
unto death. In this sense despair cannot be called the sickness unto
death. But in the Christian understanding death is itself a transition
unto life. In this sense there is no sickness unto death.

But despair is the sickness unto death. It is the torment of the
contradiction here to be unable to die. For to die signifies that it is
all over, but to die the death means to experience dying and yet not to
die.

The Forms of Despair

A. Despair regarded in such a way that one does not reflect whether it is
conscious or not; so that one reflects only upon the factors of the
synthesis.
  (a) Despair viewed under the aspect of Finitude/Infinitude.
  (b) Despair viewed under the aspect of Possibility/Necessity.

B. Despair viewed under the aspect of Consciousness.

(1) The Despair which is Unconscious that it is Despair.
(2) The Despair which is Conscious that it is Despair.
    (a) In despair at not willing to be oneself, the despair of weakness.
        (i) Despair over the earthly or something earthly.
        (ii) Despair about the eternal or over oneself.
    (b) In despair at willing to be oneself, defiance.
