The present age is one of understanding, of reflection, devoid of passion, an age which flies into enthusiasm for a moment only to decline back into indolence.

What I really lack is to be clear in my mind what I am to do, not what I am to know, except in so far as a certain understanding must precede every action. The thing is to understand myself, to see what God really wishes me to do; the thing is to find a truth which is true for me, to find the idea for which I can live and die.

Anxiety is the dizziness of freedom.

Life can only be understood backwards; but it must be lived forwards.

The highest and most beautiful thing is to be an individual.

People demand freedom of speech as a compensation for the freedom of thought which they seldom use.

There are two ways to be fooled. One is to believe what isn't true; the other is to refuse to believe what is true.

Prayer does not change God, but it changes him who prays.

Face the facts of being what you are, for that is what changes what you are.

The most common form of despair is not being who you are.

It is quite true what philosophy says: that life must be understood backwards. But that makes one forget the other saying: that it must be lived - forwards.

I have just now come from a party where I was its life and soul; witticisms streamed from my lips, everyone laughed and admired me, but I went away — yes, the dash should be as long as the radius of the earth's orbit ——————————— and wanted to shoot myself.

To dare is to lose one's footing momentarily. Not to dare is to lose oneself.

The function of prayer is not to influence God, but rather to change the nature of the one who prays.

Faith is the highest passion in a human being. Many in every generation may not come that far, but none comes further.

If I were to wish for anything, I should not wish for wealth and power, but for the passionate sense of the potential, for the eye which, ever young and ardent, sees the possible. Pleasure disappoints, possibility never. And what wine is so sparkling, what so fragrant, what so intoxicating, as possibility!

Listen to the cry of a woman in labor at the hour of giving birth — look at the dying man's struggle at his last extremity, and then tell me whether something that begins and ends thus could be intended for enjoyment.

A fire broke out backstage in a theatre. The clown came out to warn the public; they thought it was a joke and applauded. He repeated it; the acclaim was even greater. I think that's just how the world will come to an end: to general applause from wits who believe it's a joke.

Subjectivity is truth.

One must learn to be anxious in order that one may not perish either by never having been in anxiety or by succumbing in anxiety. Whoever has learned to be anxious in the right way has learned the ultimate.

It is perfectly true, as philosophers say, that life must be understood backwards. But they forget the other proposition, that it must be lived forwards.

Most men pursue pleasure with such breathless haste that they hurry past it.

My life is like an eternal night...

The paradox is the passion of thought, and the thinker without the paradox is like the lover without passion: a mediocre fellow.

I stick my finger into existence — it smells of nothing. Where am I? Who am I? How came I here? What is this thing called the world? What does this world mean? Who is it that has lured me into the thing and now leaves me there? ... How did I come into the world? Why was I not consulted... but was thrust into the ranks as if I had been bought by a kidnapper, a dealer in souls? How did I obtain an interest in this big enterprise they call reality? Why should I have an interest in it? Is it not a voluntary concern? And if I am compelled to take part in it, where is the director? I have something to say to him.
