LECTURE I. RECENT CRITICISMS OF "CONSCIOUSNESS"

There are certain occurrences which we call "mental" or "psychical,"
and others which we call "physical" or "material." A large part of
philosophical controversy is concerned with the question whether these
two classes of occurrences are two totally distinct realms, or whether
they are reducible to one. I have not myself established any peaceable
_modus vivendi_ between these two opposing points of view, but I think
that recent inquiry has made it possible to see that the issue is not
so sharp as it is generally supposed to be.

The view which I wish to advocate in these lectures is one which may
be called "neutral monism." It is the view that the "stuff" of which
the world of our experience is composed is, in my belief, neither
"mind" nor "matter," but something more primitive than either. Both
mind and matter seem to be composite, and the stuff of which they are
compounded lies in a sense between the two, in a sense above them both,
like a common ancestor.

I shall begin by a consideration of the nature of "consciousness," as
this notion has been recently criticized by the behaviorists and the
American realists.

For the purpose of this discussion, I shall take as my text-book
William James's _Essays in Radical Empiricism_. I do this because I
believe that, although there are points in his analysis where he seems
to me to have gone astray, he is nevertheless the first author to have
clearly stated the view that "consciousness" is not an entity, but a
function.

The view that "consciousness" is a function, not an entity, is not
new. It was held by Mach, and, in a less explicit form, by the early
positivists. But James gave it a new force and a new setting. His
essay "Does 'Consciousness' Exist?" (1904) contains the kernel of
the whole matter. "Consciousness," he says, "is the name of a
non-entity, and has no right to a place among first principles. Those
who still cling to it are clinging to a mere echo, the faint rumor
left behind by the disappearing 'soul' upon the air of philosophy."

This is a very revolutionary statement. We are all accustomed to think
that, however doubtful the existence of matter may be, the existence
of our own minds is indubitable. "I think, therefore I am," said
Descartes; and ever since his time it has been taken as a datum that
we are immediately aware of our own existence as thinking beings. But
James denies this. He says: "There is, I mean, no aboriginal stuff or
quality of being, contrasted with that of which material objects are
made, out of which our thoughts of them are made."

The arguments which James brings forward in support of this view are,
to my mind, very convincing. He points out that, if we analyze our
experience, we find that the distinction between "knower" and "known"
is one which falls within experience, not one which stands outside it
and relates it to something else. "The instant field of the present,"
he says, "is at all times what I call the 'pure experience.' It is only
virtually or potentially either subject or object as yet. For the time
being, it is plain, unqualified actuality, or existence, a simple
_that_."

This view, that the primary stuff of experience is neither mental
nor physical, but something neutral, is one which I find myself
increasingly inclined to accept. But I think that James goes too
far in his rejection of "consciousness." He seems to imply that the
distinction between mind and matter is one which is entirely pragmatic,
and that there is no real difference between the two. This I cannot
admit. I think that there is a real difference, though it is not the
difference which is usually supposed to exist.

The main point which I wish to make in these lectures is that the
distinction between mind and matter is not a distinction between two
different kinds of substances, but a distinction between two different
ways of arranging the same elements. The elements themselves are
neither mental nor physical; they are "neutral." But they can be
arranged in two different ways, so as to form on the one hand a
"mind," and on the other hand a "piece of matter."

Let me illustrate this by an analogy. Suppose you have a set of
photographs of a certain landscape. You can arrange these photographs
in two ways. You can arrange them geographically, so as to reconstruct
the landscape; or you can arrange them biographically, so as to
reconstruct the history of the photographer. In the first case, you
are acting like a physicist; in the second case, you are acting like a
psychologist. But the photographs themselves are the same in both cases.

So it is, I suggest, with the elements of our experience. They are
the same elements, whether we arrange them as a physical world or as
a mental world. The difference lies in the arrangement, not in the
elements themselves.

This view has the great advantage of getting rid of the dualism of mind
and matter, which has been the despair of philosophers for centuries.
If mind and matter are composed of the same stuff, then there is no
difficulty in understanding how they can interact. We do not have to
suppose that there is some mysterious "bridge" between two totally
different worlds.

But if we accept this view, we must be prepared to give up many of
our cherished beliefs about the nature of the mind. We must give up
the belief that the mind is a single, indivisible entity, a "soul"
or "self." We must regard the mind as a collection of elements, just
as we regard the body as a collection of cells. And we must be
prepared to admit that the elements of the mind are not essentially
different from the elements of the physical world.

This is a hard saying, and I do not expect you to accept it all at
once. But I hope that, as we proceed, you will see that it provides
a more coherent and scientific account of the world than the older
theories.

In the following lectures, I shall try to work out this view in detail.
I shall consider the nature of sensation, of imagery, of belief, and
of desire. And I shall try to show how all these mental phenomena can
be explained in terms of the "neutral stuff" which I have postulated.

But before I do that, I must say a few words about the method which
I propose to adopt. I shall adopt the method of analysis. That is to
say, I shall try to break down complex problems into their simpler
constituents. This is the method which has been so successful in
science, and I believe that it is the only method which can lead to
solid results in philosophy.

Philosophy has suffered too much from the attempt to solve the riddle
of the universe by a single stroke of insight. We must be content to
advance step by step, solving one little problem after another, until
we have built up a body of knowledge which is as sure and certain as
human fallibility will allow.

This is the spirit in which I approach the task before us. I do not
claim to have solved all the problems of philosophy. I only claim to
have made a beginning. And I hope that you will join me in this
adventure of thought, and help me to push back the boundaries of
ignorance a little further.
