CHAPTER I. THE SERIES OF NATURAL NUMBERS

Mathematics is a study which, when we start from its most familiar portions, may be pursued in either of two opposite directions. The more familiar direction is constructive, towards gradually increasing complexity: from integers to fractions, real numbers, complex numbers; from addition and multiplication to differentiation and integration, and on to higher mathematics. The other direction, which is less familiar, proceeds, by analysing, to greater and greater abstractness and logical simplicity; instead of asking what can be defined and deduced from what is assumed to begin with, we ask instead what more general ideas and principles can be found, in terms of which our starting-point can be defined or deduced. It is the fact of pursuing this opposite direction that characterises mathematical philosophy as opposed to ordinary mathematics. But it should be understood that the distinction is one, not in the subject matter, but in the state of mind of the investigator. Early Greek geometers, passing from the empirical rules of Egyptian land-surveying to the general propositions by which those rules were found to be justifiable, and thence to Euclid's axioms and postulates, were engaged in mathematical philosophy, according to the above definition; but when they had reached the axioms and postulates, they had only reached the beginning of "mathematics" in the ordinary sense. The distinction is similar to that between the study of language and the study of grammar.

The most obvious and easy things in mathematics are not those that come logically at the beginning; they are things that, from the point of view of logical deduction, come somewhere in the middle. Just as the easiest bodies to see are those that are neither very near nor very far, neither very small nor very great, so the easiest conceptions to grasp are those that are neither very complex nor very simple (using "simple" in a logical sense). And as we need two sorts of instruments, the telescope and the microscope, for the enlargement of our visual powers, so we need two sorts of instruments for the enlargement of our logical powers, one to take us forward to the higher mathematics, the other to take us backward to logical foundations. We shall be concerned in this book with the latter task.

We have spoken of "the series of natural numbers." The sequence of numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, ... is the most familiar of all mathematical things. But it is by no means easy to say what these numbers are, or to say what is meant by "series" or by "natural." To answer these questions is one of the main objects of mathematical philosophy.

It is customary to define the natural numbers as the numbers used in counting. But counting is by no means a simple operation. It involves a one-one relation between the set of objects counted and the set of numbers used in counting. It is thus a special case of a more general conception, that of similarity between classes. Two classes are said to be "similar" when there is a one-one relation which correlates the terms of the one class each with one term of the other class, and vice versa. For example, if you are a polygamist, your wives and your mothers-in-law are similar classes. (The relation of husband and wife is one-one, assuming monogamy on the wife's part.)

Logic, in the sense of mathematical logic, is the basis of all this. The logic which I shall advocate is one which treats numbers as classes of classes. This may seem a very odd definition, but we shall see that it works.

The fundamental logical concept which we shall use is that of a "class." Logic is concerned with classes, and with relations between classes.
