The World&#x27;s Opinion Page



                    Newsletters
                        Subscribe
                    Log in











                    Latest
                    Economics
                    Politics
                    Subscriber Exclusive
                    PS Quarterly
                    Columnists
                    Access provided by


                            Sustainability
                            Development
                            Culture
                            Democracy
                            AI
                            Venezuela
                            Iran



















































            Mikhail Svetlov/Getty Images










                                enEnglish



                                        nl Dutch
                                        de German
                                        es Spanish


                    Culture




















                            3




                    Fundamentalist Perverts







                            Jan 9, 2025

                            Slavoj &#x17D;i&#x17E;ek


                        Like Islamic extremists, Russian President Vladimir Putin wraps himself in the garb of religious orthodoxy in order to present himself as an authentic exponent of traditional values. Yet one need only consider the lives of genuine spiritual fundamentalists to see this ruse for what it really is.

LJUBLJANA – The standard interpretation of the Russia-Ukraine war is that it is a “clash of cultures” pitting Western liberalism against traditional Russian authoritarianism. But this is deeply misleading. Far from being a traditionalist, Vladimir Putin is merely the latest in a series of murderous modernizers stretching from Ivan the Terrible and Peter the Great to Catherine the Great and Stalin.

Subscribe
                    Upgrade
                Donate



            Get our weekly newsletter











        Make your inbox smarter.

            Select Newsletters

Password
                                    required


                                        Remember me?

Please enter your email address and click on the reset-password button. If your email exists in our system, we'll send you an email with a link to reset your password. Please note that the link will expire twenty-four hours after the email is sent. If you can't find this email, please check your spam folder.

If you are not already registered, this will create a PS account for you. You should receive an activation email shortly.
