Human Rights and Its Discontents
By Slavoj Zizek

Let me go directly to the point: It is a well known fact that the
close-the-door button in most elevators is a totally dysfunctional
placebo which is placed there just to give individuals the impression
that they are somehow participating, contributing to the speed of the
elevator journey. When we push this button the door closes in exactly
the same time as when we just press the floor button without speeding
up the process by pressing also the close-the-door button. This extreme
and clear case of fake participation is, I claim, an appropriate
metaphor (for) the participation of individuals in our post-modern
political process. We are all the time asked by politicians to press
such buttons. But some things are excluded. What is excluded from this
participatory, multi-culturalist, tolerant democracy?
In today's predominant ideological perception, I'm tempted to claim
work itself - that is to say manual labor as opposed to so-called
symbolic activity - work, not sex is more and more becoming the site of
obscene indecency to be concealed from the public eye. The tradition
which goes back to Wagner's opera, Rhinegold, or to Fritz Lang's film,
Metropolis, the tradition in which the working process takes place
underground, in dark caves, today culminates in the millions of
anonymous workers sweating in the Third World factories, from Chinese
gulags to Indonesian assembly lines. In their invisibility the West can
afford itself to babble about the so-called disappearing working class.
Of course, it's disappearing from here.
But what is crucial in this tradition is the equation of labor with
crime, the idea that labor, hard work, is originally an indecent
criminal activity to be hidden from the public eye. Significantly, we
ask ourselves a simple question: Where in Hollywood films do we see
still today the production process in all its intensity? I claim, as
far as I remember, and you can correct me if I'm wrong, only at one
place: in James Bond or similar films when the good guy, James Bond the
agent, penetrates the fortress of the master criminal. And then you see
it's either the drug processing or putting together of some lethal
weapon. That's the only place where you see the production process. Of
course, the function of the agent is then to explode, to destroy, to
repress again this sight of production.
This, I think, is the necessary background if we want to approach
properly the problematic of human rights today. So how are we to
approach this problematic? I want to do something which may be a
surprise to some of you. It's no irony intended. I think the Christian
legacy is all too precious to be left to, well, Christians themselves.
So what I want to do is, in the first part of my talk, to propose a
certain reading of Christianity, aiming to demonstrate how Christianity
effectively provides the foundation to human rights and freedoms.
To put it in a somewhat simplified way - I simplify it very much, I
know - there are two basic attitudes discernible in the history of
religions along the axis of the opposition between the global and the
universal: On the one hand, there is the pre-Christian pagan cosmos,
the divine hierarchical order of cosmic principles which, when copied
on the society, gives the image of a congruent edifice in which each
member is at each/his/her own place. The supreme good is here the
global balance of principles, while the evil stands for their
derailment or derangement, for the excessive assertion of one principle
to the detriment of other principles, of the masculine principle to the
detriment of the feminine one, of reason to the detriment of feeling,
and so on and so on. The cosmic balance is then reestablished through
the work of justice which, with its inexorable necessity, sets things
straight again by crushing the derailed element. With regard to the
social body, an individual is good when he or she acts in accordance
with his/her special place within the social edifice, when he respects
nature which provides food and shelter, when he respects his
superiors who take care of him in a fatherly way, and so on and so on.
And evil occurs when some particular strata or individuals are no
longer satisfied with their proper place within the global order, when
children no longer obey parents, when servants no longer obey their
masters, when the wise ruler turns into a capricious, cruel tyrant, and
so on.
So the very core of the pagan wisdom resides in the insight into this
cosmic balance of hierarchically ordered principles, more precisely,
the insight into the eternal circuit of the cosmic catastrophe,
derailment, and the restoration of order through just punishment.
Perhaps the most elaborated case of such a cosmic order is the ancient
Hindu cosmology first copied onto the social order in the guise of the
system of castes, and then onto the individual organism itself in the
guise of the harmonious hierarchy of its organs: head, hands, abdomen,
and so on. Today such an attitude is artificially resuscitated in the
multitude of New Age approaches to nature, society, and so on and so
on. So that's the standard, traditional, pagan order. Again, being good
means that you fully assume your proper place within some global order.
But Christianity, and in its own way already - maybe, I'm not sure, I
don't know enough about it - Buddhism, introduce into this global
balance, cosmic order, a principle totally foreign to it, a principle
that, measured by the standards of the pagan cosmology, cannot but
appear as a monstrous distortion, the principle according to which each
individual has an immediate access to the universality of nirvana, or
the Holy Spirit, or today, of human rights and freedoms. The idea is
that I can participate in this universal dimension directly,
irrespective of my specific particular place within the global order.
For that reason, Buddha's followers form a community of people who in
one way or another have broken with the hierarchy of the social order,
who started to treat this order as something fundamentally irrelevant.
In his choice of disciples, Buddha pointedly ignored castes and, after
some hesitation, true, even sexual difference. And do Christ's
scandalous words from Luke (14:26) look, not point, in the same
direction? "If anyone comes to me and does not hate his father and his
mother, his wife and children, his brothers and sisters, yes, even his
own life, he cannot be my disciple." Here, of course, I claim we are
not dealing with a simple brutal hatred demanded by a cruel and jealous
god. Family relations stand here metaphorically for the entire social
network, for any particular ethnic substance that determines my place
in the global order of things. The hatred enjoined by Christ is
therefore not any kind of dialectical opposite of love, but the direct
expression of love. It is love itself that enjoins me to unplug, as it
were, from my organic community into which I was born, or, as St. Paul
put it, "There are neither men nor women, neither Jews nor Greeks."
We can see here how truly heterogeneous is the Christian stance with
regard to that of the pagan wisdom. In clear contrast to the ultimate
horizon of the pagan wisdom, which is the coincidence of the opposites
- Namely, what is wisdom? The ultimate point of wisdom is that our
universe is the abyss of the primordial ground in which all false
opposites - good and evil, appearance and reality, and so on and so on
- ultimately coincide. That's wisdom. Wisdom always is basically a fake
platitude, I claim. You can be sure of it. Make a simple experiment. I
think the proper attitude of a proper Christian or leftist today is to
despise wisdom. What's wisdom? What's wisdom? Wisdom is that whatever
happens you have a good excuse. Wisdom means you do something. If you
succeed, then you have a proverb which is a form of wisdom to
legitimize it, like we in Europe have a proverb, a standard one which
says, Only those who risk can succeed. If you fail we have another
proverb to legitimize it which says in very vulgar terms - something, I
don't have it in English - You cannot urinate against the wind. That's
wisdom for me. Anything goes basically. The basic wisdom is that
differences don't matter, what was up comes down, this eternal
circulation of fortune, and so on and so on.
But in clear contrast to this logic, Christianity asserts as the
highest act precisely what the pagan wisdom condemns as the source of
evil: the gesture of separation, of drawing the line, of clinging to an
element which precisely disturbs the balance of all. The pagan reproach
that the Christian insight is not deep enough, that it fails to grasp
the primordial One-All, this primordial abyss, primordial void, thus
misses the point. Christianity is a miraculous event that disturbs the
balance of the One-All. It is the violent intrusion of difference which
throws off the rails the balanced circuit of the universe. From this
standpoint it would be interesting to approach the ideological
ambiguities of a very bad movie, George Lucas's Star Wars I: The
Phantom Menace. The film, one of whose few interests resides in the way
it endeavors to outline the answer to the question of the origin of
evil, How did Darth Vader become Darth Vader? That is to say, How died
Anakin Skywalker, this sweet boy, turn into the monstrous instrument of
cosmic evil? Two things are here crucial: First, the Christological
features of the young Anakin. If you know the movie you know that his
mother hints that she became pregnant with him in an immaculate
conception. Then we have the ways in which Anakin wins. It clearly
echoes the famous chariot race in Ben Hur, this tale of Christ. Second,
the fact that he's identified as the one who has the potential to
restore the balance of the Force. Now, here's my question: Since the
ideological universe of Star Wars is the New Age pagan universe, it is
quite consequent that its central figure of evil should echo Christ.
Within the pagan horizon the event of Christ is the ultimate scandal.
Furthermore, what if we take the premonition that Anakin will restore
the balance of the Force, not as the faithful misapprehension, but as a
correct insight? What if the suffocating character of the pagan
universe resides precisely in the fact that in this universe the
dimension of radical evil, that in it the balance was way too much in
favor of the good? So I think that that's the solution, that precisely
in this sense Anakin restores the balance. It is in order to emphasize
this suspension of social hierarchy that Christ addresses in an
accentuated way those who belong to the very bottom of the social
hierarchy, the outcasts of the social order - beggars, prostitutes - as
the privileged members of his new community. This new community is then
explicitly constructed as a collective of outcasts, the antipode to any
established organic group. Perhaps the best way to imagine such a
community is to look at it in the lineage of other eccentric
communities of outcasts that we know from past and present, from lepers
and circus freaks to early computer hackers, groups in which the
stigmatized individuals are united by a secret bond of solidarity. In
order to specify further these two communities I'm tempted to risk the
reference to Freud himself who, in his crowd psychology, provides two
examples of crowd formation as we all know: the Church and the army.
Now usually one takes these two crowd formations as equivalent without
considering the difference between the two. However, what if this
difference is crucial, along the lines of (I'm referring here to)
Ernesto Laclau, who developed the opposition between the structure of
differences, the differentiated structure, and the antagonistic logic
of equivalencies - us against them. The Church is global, a structured
institution and(?) network of hierarchically differentiated positions,
basically ecumenical, tolerant, prone to compromises, all-inclusive,
dividing the profits among the sub-groups; while in the army the accent
is on the antagonism, on us versus them, and on the egalitarian
universalism. All of us are ultimately equal when confronted with them,
the enemy. So that the army is ultimately exclusionary, prone to
annihilate the other. Of course this is an abstract proposition;
empirically the line can be blurred. We often have the militant Church
or the army that functions as a Church-like corporate social
institution.
But the fundamental paradox is that the two communities, again, often
exchange their places. There is a Church who is close to antagonistic
functioning of the army or vice versa. What I claim is that this
opposition is actual even today in the field where I'm active, for
example, in the relationship between (the) International Psychoanalytic
Association, the orthodox one and the Lacanian movement. The IPA is the
psychoanalytic church, excommunicating people from its ranks only when
it feels effectively threatened, prone to endless debates, compromises,
and so on and so on. I claim that we Lacanians are, on the contrary,
the psychoanalytic army, a combative group working towards an
aggressive re-conquest defined by the antagonism between us and them,
avoiding, rejecting even the tolerant olive branch of the IPA: Come
back, we accept you only if you also make a compromise and change
slightly the form of your activity. So with regard to political
struggles, the Freudian formula, Where it was I shall come into being,
can thus be read as, Where the church was there, the army should
arrive.
However, does Christianity not go even a further step and enjoin us,
not simply to hate parents on behalf of the Beloved One, but in the
dialectical inversion of love for one's enemy, to hate the Beloved out
of love and in love, as Kierkegaard put it? The proper way to
understand this is to ask a precise question: What dimension in the
Beloved Other am I enjoined to hate? Let me take hatred towards one's
father in the Oedipal family tension. As we see all the time, this
hatred disappears and new understanding for the father emerges the
moment the son effectively gets rid of the shadow of paternal
authority. In short, hatred disappears the moment the son perceives his
father no longer as the embodiment of his father's symbolic function,
but as a vulnerable subject which is disconnected, disattached from
this function. It is in this sense that in true love I hate the Beloved
out of love. I hate the dimension of the beloved person's inscription
into the social-symbolic structure. I hate him or her on behalf of my
very love for him as a unique person.
However, we should avoid a crucial misunderstanding here. This
unplugging, this disconnection, has nothing whatsoever to do with the
common humanist idea that one should forget about the artificial
symbolic features and perceive one's neighbor in his or her unique
humanity, that we should see the real human person beneath the other
social role, beneath ideological mandates or masks. St. Paul is here
quite explicit in his, what I'm tempted to call in today's terms,
theoretical anti-humanism. A quote from Corinthians (5:17): "From now
on, therefore, regard no one from a human point of view. Even though we
once knew Christ from a human point of view, we know him no longer in
that way. So if anyone is in Christ, there is a new creation.
Everything old has passed away, everything has become new."
So in the uncoupling from the social structure, substance, whichever we
want, the neighbor is thus reduced to a singular member of the
community of believers of the Holy Ghost. To use the modern opposition,
it is not the symbolic subject who is reduced the real individual; it
is the individual, the person in all the wealth of his or her
characteristics, features, who is reduced to the singular point of
subjectivity. As such, uncoupling effectively involves a symbolic
death. One has to die for the law that regulates our tradition, our
social substance.
The term "new creation" used by St. Paul is crucial here. It signals
the gesture of sublimation, of erasing the traces of one's past and the
beginning afresh from a zero point. Consequently, there is also a
terrifying violence at work in this uncoupling, that of the death
drive, of the radical wiping the slate clean as the condition of the
new beginning.
So again, I hope my point where I am, to put it in these terms,
pro-Christian is clear enough. I claim that the way we - how should I
put it? - the way to imagine any radical social change was opened by
this logic, which again is not the logic of this eternal circular
movement, the logic of disturbed and reestablished balance, where we
are part of some large chain of being; but it's the logic of miracle,
miracle not in the religious sense - I'm a materialist, to avoid
misunderstanding - but miracle in the sense of you can begin from the
zero point. We are not caught in an eternal movement. To be good does
not mean to be identified to your place. And it's here I claim that
human rights begin. Human rights do not mean you have your proper place
and dignity comes to you through being identified to that place. Human
rights means precisely, no, you are something independently of your
proper place. Which is why every proper right-winger or proto-fascist
always insists on one thing. This is the eternal organicist metaphoric
of fascism or proto-fascism, that society is kind of a mega-organism, a
body where the key to order is that everyone has to stick to his or her
own place, and things go wrong when people want directly to participate
at the universal dimension. While again, democracy, if this term has
any meaning today, begins precisely when you have a direct access to
the Absolute, where, independently of your place in this destructive,
violent outburst you can acquire a distance towards the specific social
structure. Because of this, against today's onslaught of New Age
neo-paganism, it seems to me both theoretically productive and
politically salient to stick to this Judaeo-Christian logic.
