The material force of ideology makes me not see what I'm effectively eating. It's not only our reality which enslaves us. The tragedy of our predicament when we are within ideology, is that when we think that we escape it into our dreams - at that point we are within ideology.

Using special "critique-of-ideology" glasses, the hero is able to see the real message beneath all the propaganda. But in reality, it is ideology which acts like glasses. The critique of ideology should be like taking off the glasses so as to see reality as it really is. However, ideology is not simply imposed on ourselves. Ideology is our spontaneous relationship to our social world - how we perceive each meaning. We, in a way, enjoy our ideology. To step out of ideology is a painful experience, we must force ourselves to do it. You must be forced to be free. If you trust simply your spontaneous sense of well-being, you will never get free.

Marx emphasized that a commodity is never just a simple object that we buy and consume. A commodity is an object full of theological, even metaphysical, niceties. Its presence always reflects an invisible transcendence. And the classical publicity for Coke quite openly refers to this absent, invisible quality. Coke is "The Real Thing" or "Coke - That's it". It's not just a chemical property or something that can be pinpointed.

In our post-modern socities, we are obliged to enjoy. Enjoyment becomes a kind or a weird perverted duty. The paradox of Coke is that you are thirsty, but the more you drink it the more thirsty you get. A desire is never simply the desire for certain thing. It's always also a desire for desire itself. Perhaps the ultimate horror of a desire is to be fully filled-in, met - so that I desire no longer. The ultimate melancholic experience is the experience - of a loss of desire itself.

We cannot return to some foregone era where we were only consuming for actual needs - if you were thirsty, you drank water, and so on. The excess is with us forever.

The German philosopher Walter Benjamin said that we experience history, not when we are engaged in things, when things move, but only when we see this rest waste of culture being half retaken by nature. At that point we get an intuition of what history means (e.g. the plane graveyard or post-apocalyptic movies like I Am Legend).

There is always in our subjectivity, in the way we experience ourselves, a minimum of hysteria. Hysteria, at its most elementary is a question addressed at the authority which defines my identity. It's the question "Why am I what you are telling me that I am?". In psychoanalytic theory, hysteria is much more subversive than perversion. A pervert has no uncertainties, while the hysterical position is that of a doubt - which is an extremely productive position. New inventions come from hysterical questioning.
