PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION

Human reason has this peculiar fate that in one species of its knowledge it is burdened by questions which, as prescribed by the very nature of reason itself, it is not able to ignore, but which, as transcending all its powers, it is also not able to answer.

The perplexity into which it thus falls is not due to any fault of its own. It begins with principles which it has no option save to employ in the course of experience, and which this experience at the same time abundantly justifies. With these reason rises, in continuous progression, to ever higher, remoter conditions. But it quickly discovers that, in this way, its work must remain ever incomplete, because new questions never cease to arise; and so it finds itself compelled to have recourse to principles which transcend the region of experience, while yet appearing so secure that reason accepts them without hesitation, and indeed that ordinary human reason cannot do without them. Thus it falls into confusion and contradictions, from which it conjectures that there must be some latent errors, which it is unable to detect, since the principles on which it proceeds, as using limits of all experience, are no longer subject to any empirical test. The battlefield of these endless controversies is called metaphysics.

Time was when metaphysics was entitled the Queen of all the sciences; and if the will be taken for the deed, the pre-eminent importance of her accepted tasks gives her every right to this title of honour. Now, however, the changed fashion of the time brings her only scorn; a matron outcast and forsaken, she mourns like Hecuba: Modo maxima rerum, tot generis natisque potens - nunc trahor exul, inops.

Her government, under the administration of the dogmatists, was at first despotic. But inasmuch as the legislation still bore traces of the ancient barbarism, her empire gradually broke up, and intestine wars introduced the reign of anarchy; while the sceptics, like nomadic tribes, who hate a permanent habitation and settled mode of living, attacked from time to time those who had organized themselves into civil communities. But their number was, very happily, small; and thus they could not entirely put a stop to the exertions of those who persisted in raising new edifices, although on no settled or uniform plan. In recent times the hope has indeed been expressed that these endless dissensions might be brought to an end, and that a judicial investigation of the claims of reason would at last establish lasting peace.

Whatever may be the reader's attitude towards this problem, he will at least admit that there are two things which, although they dwell in the mind, are strictly distinguished from one another: the object of knowledge and the knowledge of the object. The former is given to us; the latter we have to produce. The former is the matter of knowledge (the object as appearance); the latter is the form of knowledge (the concepts of the understanding). Now, if we can demonstrate that the objects of experience as appearances conform to the concepts of our understanding, and not the other way round, we shall have succeeded in justifying the possibility of synthetic a priori judgments.

I have found it necessary to deny knowledge, in order to make room for faith. The dogmatism of metaphysics, that is, the presumption that it is possible to make progress in metaphysics without previous criticism of pure reason, is the true source of all that unbelief, always very dogmatic, which militates against morality.

If this Critique is not itself to be called a metaphysics, but rather a preparation for it, it will nevertheless serve to clear the ground, and to level it, for the erection of that majestic edifice.
