Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals

PREFACE

Ancient Greek philosophy was divided into three sciences: physics,
ethics, and logic. This division is perfectly suitable to the nature of
the thing; and the only improvement that can be made in it is to add
the principle on which it is based, so that we may both satisfy
ourselves of its completeness, and also be able to determine correctly
the necessary subdivisions.

All rational knowledge is either material or formal: the former
considers some object, the latter is concerned only with the form of
the understanding and of the reason itself, and with the universal
laws of thought in general without distinction of its objects. Formal
philosophy is called logic. Material philosophy, however, has to do
with determinate objects and the laws to which they are subject, is
again twofold; for these laws are either laws of nature or of freedom.
The science of the former is physics, that of the latter, ethics; they
are also termed natural philosophy and moral philosophy respectively.

...

SECTION I

TRANSITION FROM THE COMMON RATIONAL KNOWLEDGE OF MORALITY TO THE
PHILOSOPHICAL

Nothing can possibly be conceived in the world, or even out of it,
which can be called good, without qualification, except a good will.
Intelligence, wit, judgement, and the other talents of the mind,
however they may be named, or courage, resolution, perseverance, as
qualities of temperament, are undoubtedly good and desirable in many
respects; but these gifts of nature may also become extremely bad and
mischievous if the will which is to make use of them, and which,
therefore, constitutes what is called character, is not good. It is the
same with the gifts of fortune. Power, riches, honour, even health, and
the general well-being and contentment with one's condition which is
called happiness, inspire pride, and often presumption, if there is not
a good will to correct the influence of these on the mind, and with
this also to rectify the whole principle of acting and adapt it to its
end. The sight of a being who is not adorned with a single feature of a
pure and good will, enjoying unbroken prosperity, can never give
pleasure to an impartial rational spectator. Thus a good will appears
to constitute the indispensable condition even of being worthy of
happiness.

...

The categorical imperative would be that which represented an action as
necessary of itself without reference to another end, i.e., as
objectively necessary.

...

There is therefore but one categorical imperative, namely, this: Act
only on that maxim whereby thou canst at the same time will that it
should become a universal law.
