AMBIGUITY AND FREEDOM

The continuous work of our life is to build death. Man knows and thinks this tragic ambivalence which the animal and the plant merely undergo. A new paradox is thereby introduced into his destiny. "Rational animal," "thinking reed," he escapes from his natural condition without, however, freeing himself from it. He is still a part of this world of which he is a consciousness. He asserts himself as a pure internality against which no external power can take hold, and he also experiences himself as a thing crushed by the dark weight of other things. At every moment he can grasp the non-temporal truth of his existence. But between the past which no longer is and the future which is not yet, this moment when he exists is nothing. This privilege, which he alone possesses, of being a sovereign and unique subject amidst a universe of objects, is what he shares with all his fellow-men. In turn an object for others, he is nothing more than an individual in the collectivity on which he depends.

As long as there have been men and they have lived, they have all felt this tragic ambiguity of their condition, but as long as there have been philosophers and they have thought, most of them have tried to mask it. They have striven to reduce mind to matter, or to reabsorb matter into mind, or to merge them within a single substance. Those who have accepted the dualism have established a hierarchy between body and soul which permits of considering as negligible the part of the self which cannot be saved. They have denied death, either by integrating it with life or by promising to man immortality. Or, knowning the reality of man's being and his being in the world, they have simply refused to act.

Existentialism asserts that there is no fixed human nature. We are what we make of ourselves. This is the meaning of freedom. But this freedom is not a given state of peace; it is a constant struggle. To will oneself free is also to will others free. This will is not an abstract formula. It represents a concrete bond with the world and with others.

The man who seeks to justify his life must want freedom itself absolutely and above everything else. At the same time that it requires the realization of concrete ends, of particular projects, it requires itself universally. It is not enough to say that each man is free; he must assume his freedom. And he cannot assume it without assuming the freedom of others.

The serious man, on the contrary, gets rid of his freedom by claiming to subordinate it to values which would be unconditioned. He imagines that the accession to these values consoles him for his existential lack. He is a tyrant of his own life and often a tyrant to others, because he does not recognize the ambiguity of his condition. He takes himself for a thing.

We must face the ambiguity. We must realize that our actions have consequences, that we are responsible for the world we shape. There is no escape in determinism. We are condemned to be free.
