The Ethics of Ambiguity

The continuous work of our life, says Montaigne, is to build death. . . . Man knows and thinks this tragic ambivalence which the animal and the plant merely undergo. A new paradox is thereby introduced into his destiny. "Rational animal," "thinking reed," he escapes from his natural condition without, however, freeing himself from it. He is still a part of this world of which he is a consciousness. He asserts himself as a pure internality against which no external power can take hold, and he also experiences himself as a thing crushed by the dark weight of other things. At every moment he can grasp the non-temporal truth of his existence. But between the past which no longer is and the future which is not yet, this moment when he exists is nothing. This privilege, which he alone possesses, of being a sovereign and unique subject amidst a universe of objects, is what he shares with all his fellow-men. In turn an object for others, he is nothing more than an individual in the collectivity on which he depends.

As long as there have been men and they have lived, they have all felt this tragic ambiguity of their condition, but as long as there have been philosophers and they have thought, most of them have tried to mask it. They have striven to reduce mind to matter, or to reabsorb matter into mind, or to merge them within a single substance. Those who have accepted the dualism have established a hierarchy between body and soul which permits of considering as negligible the part of the self which cannot be saved. They have denied death, either by integrating it with life or by promising to man immortality. Or, known ing the instability of earthly systems, they have denied the reality of the world.

To attain his truth, man must not attempt to dispel the ambiguity of his being but, on the contrary, accept the task of realizing it. He rejoins himself only to the extent that he agrees to remain at a distance from himself. This wish is not something arbitrary; it is not one of those "vital lies" of which Vernon Lee speaks. It arises from the very structure of human existence.

Freedom is the source from which all significations and all values spring. It is the original condition of all justification of existence. The man who seeks to justify his life must want freedom itself absolutely and above everything else. At the same time that it requires the realization of concrete ends, of particular projects, it requires itself universally. It is not a ready-made value which offers itself from the outside to my abstract adherence, but it appears (not on the plane of facility, but on the moral plane) as a cause of itself.

The Serious Man
The serious man gets rid of his freedom by claiming to subordinate it to values which would be unconditioned. He imagines that the accession to these values likewise permanently establishes his value. He settles himself in the universe and formulates ready-made values. He is a tyrant. He denies the freedom of others to secure his own.

The Nihilist
The nihilist, on the other hand, is right in thinking that the world possesses no justification, but he forgets that it is up to him to justify the world and to make himself exist validly. Instead of integrating death into life, he sees in it the only truth of the life which appears to him as a disguised death. However, there is truth in the nihilistic attitude, for it is true that man is nothing. But this nothing is not a thing; it is a movement which makes itself be.

The Adventurer
The adventurer does not propose to be; he is content to exist. He likes the action for its own sake. He finds joy in spreading into the world a freedom which remains indifferent to the content. But the adventurer can not be distinguished from the brigand or the dictator if he does not recognize the freedom of others.

The Passionate Man
The passionate man is almost the antithesis of the adventurer. In him, freedom is realized as a separation and as a passion. He sets up the object as an absolute, not, like the serious man, as a thing detached from himself, but as a thing disclosed by his subjectivity. But he is also enclosed in his subjectivity.

To will oneself free is also to will others free. This will is not an abstract formula. It points out to each person the concrete action to be achieved. But the others are separate, even opposed, and the man of good will sees concrete and difficult problems arising in his relations with them.
