The Ethics of Ambiguity (Simulated Excerpt)

The continuous work of our life, is to build death. Man has no harbor; his truth is not a static contemplation of an eternal essence, but a perpetual movement towards a future which he must create.  To exist is to make oneself a lack of being; it is to cast oneself into the world.  But this casting is not without peril.  The serious man suppresses his freedom to hide it from himself; he takes refuge in the values of the world as if they were absolute things.  He is a stone.  He wishes to be a thing.  But he is not a thing.

Freedom is the source from which all significations and all values spring. It is the original condition of all justification of existence.  The man who seeks to justify his life must want freedom itself absolutely and above everything else.  But this freedom is not a solipsistic license.  To will oneself free is also to will others free.  This is not an abstract imperative, but a concrete requirement of action.  If I oppress another, I lock myself in the role of the oppressor; I harden my own existence into a figure of tyranny.  My freedom depends on the freedom of others because I need their recognition to confirm my own project.

We are condemned to be free, as Sartre said, but we are also condemned to ambiguity.  We are both subject and object, sovereign consciousness and flesh in the world.  The failure of many ethical systems is that they try to mask this ambiguity.  They try to make us pure spirits or pure machines.  We are neither.  We are the upsurge of freedom in a situation that constrains us.  To accept this ambiguity is the beginning of authentic morality.  We must assume our failure, for every project is a failure in the sense that it never achieves absolute completion.  But in this failure lies our triumph, if we have lucidly chosen it.

The child lives in a serious world where values are given.  The adolescent discovers that these values are human creations.  At that moment, the ethical life begins.  One can choose to retreat into the seriousness of the child—to become a sub-man, who fears his freedom.  Or one can accept the burden of creating values.  This is the anguish of freedom.  But it is also its glory.  We must not look for a foreign salvation.  There is no salvation but that which we create for ourselves, day by day, through our actions in the world.
