Memoirs of a Dutiful Daughter

I was born at four o'clock in the morning on the ninth of January 1908, in a room fitted with white-lacquered furniture and overlooking the Boulevard Raspail. In the family photographs taken the following summer, one sees ladies in long dresses and ostrich-feather hats, and gentlemen wearing boaters and panamas, all smiling at a baby: they are my parents, my grandfather, uncles, aunts; and the baby is me. My father was thirty, my mother twenty-one, and I was their first child. I turn the page: here is a photograph of Maman holding in her arms a baby who isn't me; I am wearing a pleated skirt and a beret; I am two and a half, and my sister has just been born. I was apparently jealous, but not for long. As far back as I can remember, I was always proud of being the elder: the first. Disguised as Little Red Riding Hood and carrying a basket of cakes and a pot of butter, I felt myself to be much more interesting than an infant swaddled in its lace cradle. I had a little sister: that baby doll didn't have me.

I remember a red plush carpet with a pattern of green leaves. I used to look at it when I was on my hands and knees on the floor. I remember a black lacquer table with gold Chinese characters on it. I remember the white walls of my nursery.

I was a very pious child. I loved God with a passion. I remember the smell of incense in the church, the flickering candles, the stained glass windows. I felt that I was special, chosen by God.

My father was a man of the world, witty, charming, and cynical. He loved the theater, literature, and good food. He didn't believe in God, but he insisted that we should be brought up as good Catholics. "A woman without religion," he used to say, "is like a flower without perfume." My mother was devout, serious, and deeply attached to her family. She was the one who saw to our education, our manners, our religious instruction.

I soon discovered the pleasure of reading. Books were my refuge, my escape, my window on the world. I read everything I could get my hands on: fairy tales, adventure stories, the classics. I lived in my imagination. I invented stories for myself and for my sister. We played elaborate games in which we were queens, saints, or explorers.

As I grew older, I began to question the values of my environment. I saw the hypocrisy of the bourgeoisie, the injustice of the social order, the limitations placed on women. I wanted to be free, to live my own life, to write. I decided that I would not marry, that I would not have children, that I would dedicate myself to my work.

I remember the day I told my father that I wanted to study philosophy. He was shocked. "Philosophy is not for women," he said. "It will make you unhappy. It will make you unmarriageable." But I was determined. I knew that philosophy was the key to understanding the world, to finding meaning in life.

The world about us was changing. The war had ended, but peace was fragile. New ideas were in the air: socialism, communism, surrealism. I was eager to explore them all. I met Sartre, and my life changed forever. We became inseparable. We talked for hours, days, weeks. We shared everything: our thoughts, our feelings, our work. We made a pact: we would be free, but we would always be honest with each other.

I realized that my childhood was over. The dutiful daughter was dead. A new woman was being born.
