I was born at four o'clock in the morning on the 9th of January 1908, in a room fitted with white-enamelled furniture and overlooking the Boulevard Raspail. In the family photographs taken the following summer, I see ladies in long dresses and picture hats with ostrich feathers, and gentlemen wearing boaters and panamas, all smiling at a baby: they are my parents, my grandfather, uncles, aunts; and the baby is me. My father was thirty, my mother twenty-one, and I was their first child. I turn the page: here is a photograph of Mamma holding in her arms a baby who isn't me; I am wearing a pleated skirt and a tam-o'-shanter; I am two and a half, and my sister has just been born. I was apparently jealous, but not for long. As far back as I can remember, I was always proud of being the elder: the first. Disguised as Little Red Riding Hood and carrying a basket of cakes and a pot of butter, I felt myself much more interesting than an infant swaddled in lace in its cradle. I had a little sister: that waif didn't have me.

My father was a man of the world, a brilliant talker, an amateur actor; he loved the theatre and literature. He had a great influence on me. He used to say: "Simone has a man's brain; she thinks like a man; she is a man." He was very proud of my successes at school. And yet, he remained a traditionalist. He believed that a woman's place was in the home, that she should be a wife and mother. But since he had lost his fortune, he had to accept the fact that his daughters would have to work for a living. This contradiction in his attitude was a source of great difficulty for me. On the one hand, he encouraged my intellectual ambitions; on the other, he deplored the fact that I was not a "real woman" in the social sense.

My mother was a devout Catholic. She brought us up in the strict observance of religion. For a long time, I was very pious. I wanted to be a saint. I used to play at being a martyr. But as I grew older, I began to question my faith. I could not reconcile the suffering in the world with the idea of a good and all-powerful God. And I found the restrictions of religion increasingly stifling. At the age of fourteen, I lost my faith. It was a liberation, but also a great loss. I felt alone in the universe, without the comforting presence of God. I had to find my own meaning in life.

I decided that I would be a writer. I wanted to tell the truth about my life and the lives of others. I wanted to communicate my experience of the world. I believed that literature was the highest form of human activity. I read voraciously: French classics, English novels, Russian literature. I began to keep a diary. I wrote stories and essays. I was determined to succeed.

I met Jean-Paul Sartre at the Sorbonne. He was the most intelligent person I had ever met. We became inseparable. We shared everything: our thoughts, our work, our lives. We made a pact: we would be "essential" loves, but we would also allow ourselves "contingent" loves. We would never lie to each other. We would tell each other everything. This relationship was the most important one in my life. It gave me the intellectual companionship and emotional support I needed to pursue my work. But it was not without its difficulties.
