I was born at four o'clock in the morning on the 9th of January 1908, in a room fitted with white-lacquered furniture and overlooking the Boulevard Raspail. In the family photographs taken the following summer, I see ladies in long dresses and feathered hats, and gentlemen in straw boaters and panamas, all smiling at a baby: they are my parents, my grandfather, uncles, aunts; and the baby is me. My father was thirty, my mother twenty-one, and I was their first child. I turn the page: here is a photograph of Maman holding me in her arms; I am wearing a lace dress and a bonnet with pink ribbons; I am about six months old, and I am looking at the camera with a grave and solemn expression.

My earliest memories are of a world that was safe, warm, and colorful. I remember the red plush of the dining-room chairs, the gleam of the silverware, the smell of waxing polish in the hall. I remember the heavy curtains that shut out the night and the cold. I felt protected. I was the center of attention, the object of everyone's love and admiration.

But as I grew older, I began to discover that the world was not as simple as I had thought. There were rules to be obeyed, duties to be performed. I learned that I was a girl, and that meant that I was expected to behave in a certain way. I was expected to be quiet, obedient, and modest. I was expected to learn how to cook and sew, and to prepare myself for marriage and motherhood.

I rebelled against these expectations. I wanted to be free. I wanted to learn, to explore, to create. I wanted to write books, to travel, to meet interesting people. I did not want to be confined to the domestic sphere. I wanted to have a life of my own, a life that was meaningful and fulfilling.

My father encouraged my intellectual curiosity. He was a man of letters, a lover of the theater and the arts. He read to me from the classics, and he talked to me about history and philosophy. He treated me as an equal, and he respected my opinions.

My mother, on the other hand, was more traditional. She was a devout Catholic, and she believed that a woman's place was in the home. She worried about my lack of religious faith, and she tried to steer me towards a more conventional path.

I loved my parents, but I felt torn between their conflicting values. I wanted to please them both, but I knew that I could not do so without sacrificing my own integrity. I had to find my own way, my own truth.

I found solace in books. Reading was my escape, my refuge. I devoured novels, biographies, histories, anything I could get my hands on. I identified with the heroes and heroines of literature, and I dreamed of one day becoming a writer myself.

I also found comfort in my friendship with Zaza. Zaza was my best friend, my soulmate. We shared everything: our secrets, our dreams, our fears. We were inseparable. Zaza was brilliant, witty, and rebellious like me. We encouraged each other to challenge the status quo, to question authority, to think for ourselves.

Together, we navigated the treacherous waters of adolescence. We struggled against the constraints of our upbringing, the expectations of our society, the dogmas of our religion. We fought for our independence, our right to be ourselves.

It was a difficult journey, full of pain and confusion. But it was also a journey of discovery, of growth, of liberation. And in the end, I emerged from it stronger, wiser, and more determined than ever to live my life on my own terms.
