I was born at four o'clock in the morning on the 9th of January 1908, in a room fitted with white-enamelled furniture and overlooking the Boulevard Raspail. In the family photographs taken the following summer, the ladies can be seen wearing long skirts and ostrich-feather hats, the gentlemen boaters and Panama hats, smiling at a baby: they are my parents, my grandfather, uncles, aunts; and I am the baby. My father was thirty, my mother twenty-one, and I was their first child. I turn the page of the album; Mother is holding in her arms a baby who isn't me; I am wearing a pleated skirt and a tam-o'-shanter; I am two and a half, and my sister has just been born. I was evidently jealous, but not for long. As far back as I can remember, I was proud of being the elder: the first. Disguised as Little Red Riding Hood and carrying a basket full of cakes and a pot of butter, I felt myself to be much more interesting than an infant nailed to its cradle. I had a little sister: that baby doll didn't have me.

I remember a time when the world was vast and full of mysteries. I remember the smell of the varnish on the furniture in my grandmother's house, the taste of the madeleines she dipped in her tea. I remember the sound of the rain against the windowpane, a sound that seemed to me to be the very voice of sadness. But I also remember the joy of running in the Luxembourg Gardens, the thrill of learning to read, the discovery that words could capture the essence of things.

As I grew older, I realized that the world was not as simple as it had seemed. I began to see the cracks in the facade of bourgeois respectability. I saw the hypocrisy of those who claimed to be virtuous while exploiting others. I saw the injustice of a society that denied women the same rights and opportunities as men. And I knew that I could not be content to simply accept the world as it was. I had to question it, to challenge it, to make my own way in it. I wanted to write, to create, to leave my mark on the world. I wanted to be free.
