Introduction

For a long time I have hesitated to write a book on woman. The subject is irritating, especially to women; and it is not new. Enough ink has been spilled in the quarreling over feminism, now practically over, and perhaps we should say no more about it. It is still talked about, however, for the voluminous nonsense uttered during the last century seems to have done little to illuminate the problem. After all, is there a problem? And if so, what is it? Are there women, really? Most assuredly the theory of the eternal feminine still has its adherents who will whisper in your ear: "Even in Russia women still are women"; but other people well informed—even the victims themselves—report that Woman is losing her way, Woman is lost. One wonders if women still exist, if they will always exist, whether or not it is desirable that they should, what place they occupy in this world, what their place should be. "What has become of women?" was asked recently in an ephemeral magazine.

One is not born, but rather becomes, a woman. No biological, psychological, or economic fate determines the figure that the human female presents in society; it is civilization as a whole that produces this creature, intermediate between male and eunuch, which is described as feminine. Only the intervention of someone else can establish an individual as an Other.

The Ethics of Ambiguity

The man who finds himself cast into the universe has no place, no purpose, no justification. He is an existence without essence. He must create himself. But this creation is not a solitary act; it is done in a world populated by others. To will oneself free is also to will others free.

As long as there have been men and they have lived, they have all felt this tragic ambiguity of their condition, but as long as there have been philosophers and they have thought, most of them have tried to mask it. They have striven to reduce mind to matter, or to reabsorb matter into mind, or to merge them within a single substance.

The sub-man makes his way across the world like a blind man. He is afraid of his freedom. He tries to hide from it. He takes refuge in the seriousness of the values established by others.

To be free is not to have the power to do anything you like; it is to be able to surpass the given toward an open future.
