What is the meaning of a word?
Let us attack this question by asking, first, what is an explanation of the meaning of a word; what does the explanation of a word look like?
The way this question helps us is analogous to the way the question "how do we measure a length?" helps us to understand the problem "what is length?"
The questions "What is length?", "What is meaning?", "What is the number one?" etc., produce in us a mental cramp. We feel that we can't point to anything in reply to them and yet ought to point to something. (We are up against one of the great sources of philosophical bewilderment: a substantive makes us look for a thing that corresponds to it.)
One difficulty which strikes us is that for many words in our language there isn't one general explanation of their meaning.
There is a common temptation to think that the meaning of a word is an image, or a mental state, or a feeling.
But if we look at the way words are actually used, we see that the meaning of a word is not an image, but the way it is used in the language-game.
I want to say: The meaning of a word is its use in the language.
And the meaning of a name is sometimes explained by pointing to its bearer.
Thinking is essentially the activity of operating with signs. This activity is performed by the hand, when we think by writing; by the mouth and larynx, when we think by speaking; and if we think by imagining signs or pictures, I can give you no agent that thinks. If then you say that in such cases the mind thinks, I would only draw your attention to the fact that you are using a metaphor, that here the mind is an agent in a different sense from that in which the hand can be said to be the agent.
Philosophy, as we use the word, is a fight against the fascination which forms of expression exert upon us.
I want to say here that it can never be our job to reduce anything to anything, or to explain anything. Philosophy really is "purely descriptive".
If we look at the river of life and the language that flows with it, we see that the concepts we use are fluid, not fixed.
We are unable to clearly circumscribe the concepts we use; not because we don't know their real definition, but because there is no real 'definition' to them. To suppose that there must be would be like supposing that whenever children play with a ball they play a game according to strict rules.
The idea that in order to get clear about the meaning of a general term one had to find the common element in all its applications has shackled philosophical investigation; for it has not only led to no result, but also made the philosopher dismiss as irrelevant the concrete cases, which alone could have helped him to understand the usage of the general term.
We don't use language according to strict rules - it hasn't been taught to us by means of strict rules, either. We, in our discussions on the other hand, constantly compare language with a calculus proceeding according to exact rules.
This is a very one-sided way of looking at language. In practice we very rarely use language as such a calculus. For not only do we not think of the rules of usage - of definitions, etc. - while using language, but when we are asked to give such rules, in most cases we aren't able to do so. We are unable clearly to circumscribe the concepts we use; not because we don't know their real definition, but because there is no real 'definition' to them.
The symbol 'a' stands for the object a.
The symbol 'red' stands for the property red.
The symbol 'p' stands for the state of affairs p.
This is all misleading.
There is a tendency to look for a "substance" whenever we see a substantive.
There is no such thing as a "mental process" of understanding which accompanies the hearing of a sentence.
Understanding is not a mental process.
To understand a sentence means to understand a language. To understand a language means to be master of a technique.
