6 The general form of a truth-function is [p, E, N(E)]. This is the general
form of a proposition.


6.001 What this says is just that every proposition is a result of
successive applications to elementary propositions of the operation N(E)


6.002 If we are given the general form according to which propositions are
constructed, then with it we are also given the general form according to
which one proposition can be generated out of another by means of an
operation.


6.01 Therefore the general form of an operation /'(n) is [E, N(E)] ' (n) (
= [n, E, N(E)]). This is the most general form of transition from one
proposition to another.


6.02 And this is how we arrive at numbers. I give the following definitions
x = /0x Def., /'/v'x = /v+1'x Def. So, in accordance with these rules,
which deal with signs, we write the series x, /'x, /'/'x, /'/'/'x, ... , in
the following way /0'x, /0+1'x, /0+1+1'x, /0+1+1+1'x, ... . Therefore,
instead of '[x, E, /'E]', I write '[/0'x, /v'x, /v+1'x]'. And I give the
following definitions 0 + 1 = 1 Def., 0 + 1 + 1 = 2 Def., 0 + 1 + 1 +1 = 3
Def., (and so on).


6.021 A number is the exponent of an operation.


6.022 The concept of number is simply what is common to all numbers, the
general form of a number. The concept of number is the variable number. And
the concept of numerical equality is the general form of all particular
cases of numerical equality.


6.03 The general form of an integer is [0, E, E +1].


6.031 The theory of classes is completely superfluous in mathematics. This
is connected with the fact that the generality required in mathematics is
not accidental generality.


6.1 The propositions of logic are tautologies.


6.11 Therefore the propositions of logic say nothing. (They are the
analytic propositions.)


6.111 All theories that make a proposition of logic appear to have content
are false. One might think, for example, that the words 'true' and 'false'
signified two properties among other properties, and then it would seem to
be a remarkable fact that every proposition possessed one of these
properties. On this theory it seems to be anything but obvious, just as,
for instance, the proposition, 'All roses are either yellow or red', would
not sound obvious even if it were true. Indeed, the logical proposition
acquires all the characteristics of a proposition of natural science and
this is the sure sign that it has been construed wrongly.


6.112 The correct explanation of the propositions of logic must assign to
them a unique status among all propositions.


6.113 It is the peculiar mark of logical propositions that one can
recognize that they are true from the symbol alone, and this fact contains
in itself the whole philosophy of logic. And so too it is a very important
fact that the truth or falsity of non-logical propositions cannot be
recognized from the propositions alone.


6.12 The fact that the propositions of logic are tautologies shows the
formal--logical--properties of language and the world. The fact that a
tautology is yielded by this particular way of connecting its constituents
characterizes the logic of its constituents. If propositions are to yield a
tautology when they are connected in a certain way, they must have certain
structural properties. So their yielding a tautology when combined in this
shows that they possess these structural properties.


6.1201 For example, the fact that the propositions 'p' and 'Pp' in the
combination '(p . Pp)' yield a tautology shows that they contradict one
another. The fact that the propositions 'p z q', 'p', and 'q', combined
with one another in the form '(p z q) . (p) :z: (q)', yield a tautology
shows that q follows from p and p z q. The fact that '(x) . fxx :z: fa' is
a tautology shows that fa follows from (x) . fx. Etc. etc.


6.1202 It is clear that one could achieve the same purpose by using
contradictions instead of tautologies.


6.1203 In order to recognize an expression as a tautology, in cases where
no generality-sign occurs in it, one can employ the following intuitive
method: instead of 'p', 'q', 'r', etc. I write 'TpF', 'TqF', 'TrF', etc.
Truth-combinations I express by means of brackets, e.g. and I use lines to
express the correlation of the truth or falsity of the whole proposition
with the truth-combinations of its truth-arguments, in the following way So
this sign, for instance, would represent the proposition p z q. Now, by way
of example, I wish to examine the proposition P(p .Pp) (the law of
contradiction) in order to determine whether it is a tautology. In our
notation the form 'PE' is written as and the form 'E . n' as Hence the
proposition P(p . Pp). reads as follows If we here substitute 'p' for 'q'
and examine how the outermost T and F are connected with the innermost
ones, the result will be that the truth of the whole proposition is
correlated with all the truth-combinations of its argument, and its falsity
with none of the truth-combinations.


6.121 The propositions of logic demonstrate the logical properties of
propositions by combining them so as to form propositions that say nothing.
This method could also be called a zero-method. In a logical proposition,
propositions are brought into equilibrium with one another, and the state
of equilibrium then indicates what the logical constitution of these
propositions must be.


6.122 It follows from this that we can actually do without logical
propositions; for in a suitable notation we can in fact recognize the
formal properties of propositions by mere inspection of the propositions
themselves.


6.1221 If, for example, two propositions 'p' and 'q' in the combination 'p
z q' yield a tautology, then it is clear that q follows from p. For
example, we see from the two propositions themselves that 'q' follows from
'p z q . p', but it is also possible to show it in this way: we combine
them to form 'p z q . p :z: q', and then show that this is a tautology.


6.1222 This throws some light on the question why logical propositions
cannot be confirmed by experience any more than they can be refuted by it.
Not only must a proposition of logic be irrefutable by any possible
experience, but it must also be unconfirmable by any possible experience.


6.1223 Now it becomes clear why people have often felt as if it were for us
to 'postulate ' the 'truths of logic'. The reason is that we can postulate
them in so far as we can postulate an adequate notation.


6.1224 It also becomes clear now why logic was called the theory of forms
and of inference.


6.123 Clearly the laws of logic cannot in their turn be subject to laws of
logic. (There is not, as Russell thought, a special law of contradiction
for each 'type'; one law is enough, since it is not applied to itself.)


6.1231 The mark of a logical proposition is not general validity. To be
general means no more than to be accidentally valid for all things. An
ungeneralized proposition can be tautological just as well as a generalized
one.


6.1232 The general validity of logic might be called essential, in contrast
with the accidental general validity of such propositions as 'All men are
mortal'. Propositions like Russell's 'axiom of reducibility' are not
logical propositions, and this explains our feeling that, even if they were
true, their truth could only be the result of a fortunate accident.


6.1233 It is possible to imagine a world in which the axiom of reducibility
is not valid. It is clear, however, that logic has nothing to do with the
question whether our world really is like that or not.


6.124 The propositions of logic describe the scaffolding of the world, or
rather they represent it. They have no 'subject-matter'. They presuppose
that names have meaning and elementary propositions sense; and that is
their connexion with the world. It is clear that something about the world
must be indicated by the fact that certain combinations of symbols--whose
essence involves the possession of a determinate character--are
tautologies. This contains the decisive point. We have said that some
things are arbitrary in the symbols that we use and that some things are
not. In logic it is only the latter that express: but that means that logic
is not a field in which we express what we wish with the help of signs, but
rather one in which the nature of the absolutely necessary signs speaks for
itself. If we know the logical syntax of any sign-language, then we have
already been given all the propositions of logic.


6.125 It is possible--indeed possible even according to the old conception
of logic--to give in advance a description of all 'true' logical
propositions.


6.1251 Hence there can never be surprises in logic.


6.126 One can calculate whether a proposition belongs to logic, by
calculating the logical properties of the symbol. And this is what we do
when we 'prove' a logical proposition. For, without bothering about sense
or meaning, we construct the logical proposition out of others using only
rules that deal with signs . The proof of logical propositions consists in
the following process: we produce them out of other logical propositions by
successively applying certain operations that always generate further
tautologies out of the initial ones. (And in fact only tautologies follow
from a tautology.) Of course this way of showing that the propositions of
logic are tautologies is not at all essential to logic, if only because the
propositions from which the proof starts must show without any proof that
they are tautologies.


6.1261 In logic process and result are equivalent. (Hence the absence of
surprise.)


6.1262 Proof in logic is merely a mechanical expedient to facilitate the
recognition of tautologies in complicated cases.


6.1263 Indeed, it would be altogether too remarkable if a proposition that
had sense could be proved logically from others, and so too could a logical
proposition. It is clear from the start that a logical proof of a
proposition that has sense and a proof in logic must be two entirely
different things.


6.1264 A proposition that has sense states something, which is shown by its
proof to be so. In logic every proposition is the form of a proof. Every
proposition of logic is a modus ponens represented in signs. (And one
cannot express the modus ponens by means of a proposition.)


6.1265 It is always possible to construe logic in such a way that every
proposition is its own proof.


6.127 All the propositions of logic are of equal status: it is not the case
that some of them are essentially derived propositions. Every tautology
itself shows that it is a tautology.


6.1271 It is clear that the number of the 'primitive propositions of logic'
is arbitrary, since one could derive logic from a single primitive
proposition, e.g. by simply constructing the logical product of Frege's
primitive propositions. (Frege would perhaps say that we should then no
longer have an immediately self-evident primitive proposition. But it is
remarkable that a thinker as rigorous as Frege appealed to the degree of
self-evidence as the criterion of a logical proposition.)


6.13 Logic is not a body of doctrine, but a mirror-image of the world.
Logic is transcendental.


6.2 Mathematics is a logical method. The propositions of mathematics are
equations, and therefore pseudo-propositions.


6.21 A proposition of mathematics does not express a thought.


6.211 Indeed in real life a mathematical proposition is never what we want.
Rather, we make use of mathematical propositions only in inferences from
propositions that do not belong to mathematics to others that likewise do
not belong to mathematics. (In philosophy the question, 'What do we
actually use this word or this proposition for?' repeatedly leads to
valuable insights.)


6.22 The logic of the world, which is shown in tautologies by the
propositions of logic, is shown in equations by mathematics.


6.23 If two expressions are combined by means of the sign of equality, that
means that they can be substituted for one another. But it must be manifest
in the two expressions themselves whether this is the case or not. When two
expressions can be substituted for one another, that characterizes their
logical form.


6.231 It is a property of affirmation that it can be construed as double
negation. It is a property of '1 + 1 + 1 + 1' that it can be construed as
'(1 + 1) + (1 + 1)'.


6.232 Frege says that the two expressions have the same meaning but
different senses. But the essential point about an equation is that it is
not necessary in order to show that the two expressions connected by the
sign of equality have the same meaning, since this can be seen from the two
expressions themselves.


6.2321 And the possibility of proving the propositions of mathematics means
simply that their correctness can be perceived without its being necessary
that what they express should itself be compared with the facts in order to
determine its correctness.


6.2322 It is impossible to assert the identity of meaning of two
expressions. For in order to be able to assert anything about their
meaning, I must know their meaning, and I cannot know their meaning without
knowing whether what they mean is the same or different.


6.2323 An equation merely marks the point of view from which I consider the
two expressions: it marks their equivalence in meaning.


6.233 The question whether intuition is needed for the solution of
mathematical problems must be given the answer that in this case language
itself provides the necessary intuition.


6.2331 The process of calculating serves to bring about that intuition.
Calculation is not an experiment.


6.234 Mathematics is a method of logic.


6.2341 It is the essential characteristic of mathematical method that it
employs equations. For it is because of this method that every proposition
of mathematics must go without saying.


6.24 The method by which mathematics arrives at its equations is the method
of substitution. For equations express the substitutability of two
expressions and, starting from a number of equations, we advance to new
equations by substituting different expressions in accordance with the
equations.


6.241 Thus the proof of the proposition 2 t 2 = 4 runs as follows: (/v)n'x
= /v x u'x Def., /2 x 2'x = (/2)2'x = (/2)1 + 1'x = /2' /2'x = /1 + 1'/1 +
1'x = (/'/)'(/'/)'x =/'/'/'/'x = /1 + 1 + 1 + 1'x = /4'x. 6.3 The
exploration of logic means the exploration of everything that is subject to
law . And outside logic everything is accidental.


6.31 The so-called law of induction cannot possibly be a law of logic,
since it is obviously a proposition with sense.---Nor, therefore, can it be
an a priori law.


6.32 The law of causality is not a law but the form of a law.


6.321 'Law of causality'--that is a general name. And just as in mechanics,
for example, there are 'minimum-principles', such as the law of least
action, so too in physics there are causal laws, laws of the causal form.


6.3211 Indeed people even surmised that there must be a 'law of least
action' before they knew exactly how it went. (Here, as always, what is
certain a priori proves to be something purely logical.)


6.33 We do not have an a priori belief in a law of conservation, but rather
a priori knowledge of the possibility of a logical form.


6.34 All such propositions, including the principle of sufficient reason,
tile laws of continuity in nature and of least effort in nature, etc. etc.--
all these are a priori insights about the forms in which the propositions
of science can be cast.


6.341 Newtonian mechanics, for example, imposes a unified form on the
description of the world. Let us imagine a white surface with irregular
black spots on it. We then say that whatever kind of picture these make, I
can always approximate as closely as I wish to the description of it by
covering the surface with a sufficiently fine square mesh, and then saying
of every square whether it is black or white. In this way I shall have
imposed a unified form on the description of the surface. The form is
optional, since I could have achieved the same result by using a net with a
triangular or hexagonal mesh. Possibly the use of a triangular mesh would
have made the description simpler: that is to say, it might be that we
could describe the surface more accurately with a coarse triangular mesh
than with a fine square mesh (or conversely), and so on. The different nets
correspond to different systems for describing the world. Mechanics
determines one form of description of the world by saying that all
propositions used in the description of the world must be obtained in a
given way from a given set of propositions--the axioms of mechanics. It
thus supplies the bricks for building the edifice of science, and it says,
'Any building that you want to erect, whatever it may be, must somehow be
constructed with these bricks, and with these alone.' (Just as with the
number-system we must be able to write down any number we wish, so with the
system of mechanics we must be able to write down any proposition of
physics that we wish.)


6.342 And now we can see the relative position of logic and mechanics. (The
net might also consist of more than one kind of mesh: e.g. we could use
both triangles and hexagons.) The possibility of describing a picture like
the one mentioned above with a net of a given form tells us nothing about
the picture. (For that is true of all such pictures.) But what does
characterize the picture is that it can be described completely by a
particular net with a particular size of mesh. Similarly the possibility of
describing the world by means of Newtonian mechanics tells us nothing about
the world: but what does tell us something about it is the precise way in
which it is possible to describe it by these means. We are also told
something about the world by the fact that it can be described more simply
with one system of mechanics than with another.


6.343 Mechanics is an attempt to construct according to a single plan all
the true propositions that we need for the description of the world.


6.3431 The laws of physics, with all their logical apparatus, still speak,
however indirectly, about the objects of the world.


6.3432 We ought not to forget that any description of the world by means of
mechanics will be of the completely general kind. For example, it will
never mention particular point-masses: it will only talk about any point-
masses whatsoever.


6.35 Although the spots in our picture are geometrical figures,
nevertheless geometry can obviously say nothing at all about their actual
form and position. The network, however, is purely geometrical; all its
properties can be given a priori. Laws like the principle of sufficient
reason, etc. are about the net and not about what the net describes.


6.36 If there were a law of causality, it might be put in the following
way: There are laws of nature. But of course that cannot be said: it makes
itself manifest.


6.361 One might say, using Hertt:'s terminology, that only connexions that
are subject to law are thinkable.


6.3611 We cannot compare a process with 'the passage of time'--there is no
such thing--but only with another process (such as the working of a
chronometer). Hence we can describe the lapse of time only by relying on
some other process. Something exactly analogous applies to space: e.g. when
people say that neither of two events (which exclude one another) can
occur, because there is nothing to cause the one to occur rather than the
other, it is really a matter of our being unable to describe one of the two
events unless there is some sort of asymmetry to be found. And if such an
asymmetry is to be found, we can regard it as the cause of the occurrence
of the one and the non-occurrence of the other.


6.36111 Kant's problem about the right hand and the left hand, which cannot
be made to coincide, exists even in two dimensions. Indeed, it exists in
one-dimensional space in which the two congruent figures, a and b, cannot
be made to coincide unless they are moved out of this space. The right hand
and the left hand are in fact completely congruent. It is quite irrelevant
that they cannot be made to coincide. A right-hand glove could be put on
the left hand, if it could be turned round in four-dimensional space.


6.362 What can be described can happen too: and what the law of causality
is meant to exclude cannot even be described.


6.363 The procedure of induction consists in accepting as true the simplest
law that can be reconciled with our experiences.


6.3631 This procedure, however, has no logical justification but only a
psychological one. It is clear that there are no grounds for believing that
the simplest eventuality will in fact be realized.


6.36311 It is an hypothesis that the sun will rise tomorrow: and this means
that we do not know whether it will rise.


6.37 There is no compulsion making one thing happen because another has
happened. The only necessity that exists is logical necessity.


6.371 The whole modern conception of the world is founded on the illusion
that the so-called laws of nature are the explanations of natural
phenomena.


6.372 Thus people today stop at the laws of nature, treating them as
something inviolable, just as God and Fate were treated in past ages. And
in fact both are right and both wrong: though the view of the ancients is
clearer in so far as they have a clear and acknowledged terminus, while the
modern system tries to make it look as if everything were explained.


6.373 The world is independent of my will.


6.374 Even if all that we wish for were to happen, still this would only be
a favour granted by fate, so to speak: for there is no logical connexion
between the will and the world, which would guarantee it, and the supposed
physical connexion itself is surely not something that we could will.


6.375 Just as the only necessity that exists is logical necessity, so too
the only impossibility that exists is logical impossibility.


6.3751 For example, the simultaneous presence of two colours at the same
place in the visual field is impossible, in fact logically impossible,
since it is ruled out by the logical structure of colour. Let us think how
this contradiction appears in physics: more or less as follows--a particle
cannot have two velocities at the same time; that is to say, it cannot be
in two places at the same time; that is to say, particles that are in
different places at the same time cannot be identical. (It is clear that
the logical product of two elementary propositions can neither be a
tautology nor a contradiction. The statement that a point in the visual
field has two different colours at the same time is a contradiction.)


6.4 All propositions are of equal value.


6.41 The sense of the world must lie outside the world. In the world
everything is as it is, and everything happens as it does happen: in it no
value exists--and if it did exist, it would have no value. If there is any
value that does have value, it must lie outside the whole sphere of what
happens and is the case. For all that happens and is the case is
accidental. What makes it non-accidental cannot lie within the world, since
if it did it would itself be accidental. It must lie outside the world.


6.42 So too it is impossible for there to be propositions of ethics.
Propositions can express nothing that is higher.


6.421 It is clear that ethics cannot be put into words. Ethics is
transcendental. (Ethics and aesthetics are one and the same.)


6.422 When an ethical law of the form, 'Thou shalt ...' is laid down, one's
first thought is, 'And what if I do, not do it?' It is clear, however, that
ethics has nothing to do with punishment and reward in the usual sense of
the terms. So our question about the consequences of an action must be
unimportant.--At least those consequences should not be events. For there
must be something right about the question we posed. There must indeed be
some kind of ethical reward and ethical punishment, but they must reside in
the action itself. (And it is also clear that the reward must be something
pleasant and the punishment something unpleasant.)


6.423 It is impossible to speak about the will in so far as it is the
subject of ethical attributes. And the will as a phenomenon is of interest
only to psychology.


6.43 If the good or bad exercise of the will does alter the world, it can
alter only the limits of the world, not the facts--not what can be
expressed by means of language. In short the effect must be that it becomes
an altogether different world. It must, so to speak, wax and wane as a
whole. The world of the happy man is a different one from that of the
unhappy man.


6.431 So too at death the world does not alter, but comes to an end.


6.4311 Death is not an event in life: we do not live to experience death.
If we take eternity to mean not infinite temporal duration but
timelessness, then eternal life belongs to those who live in the present.
Our life has no end in just the way in which our visual field has no
limits.


6.4312 Not only is there no guarantee of the temporal immortality of the
human soul, that is to say of its eternal survival after death; but, in any
case, this assumption completely fails to accomplish the purpose for which
it has always been intended. Or is some riddle solved by my surviving for
ever? Is not this eternal life itself as much of a riddle as our present
life? The solution of the riddle of life in space and time lies outside
space and time. (It is certainly not the solution of any problems of
natural science that is required.)


6.432 How things are in the world is a matter of complete indifference for
what is higher. God does not reveal himself in the world.


6.4321 The facts all contribute only to setting the problem, not to its
solution.


6.44 It is not how things are in the world that is mystical, but that it
exists.


6.45 To view the world sub specie aeterni is to view it as a whole--a
limited whole. Feeling the world as a limited whole--it is this that is
mystical.


6.5 When the answer cannot be put into words, neither can the question be
put into words. The riddle does not exist. If a question can be framed at
all, it is also possible to answer it.


6.51 Scepticism is not irrefutable, but obviously nonsensical, when it
tries to raise doubts where no questions can be asked. For doubt can exist
only where a question exists, a question only where an answer exists, and
an answer only where something can be said.


6.52 We feel that even when all possible scientific questions have been
answered, the problems of life remain completely untouched. Of course there
are then no questions left, and this itself is the answer.


6.521 The solution of the problem of life is seen in the vanishing of the
problem. (Is not this the reason why those who have found after a long
period of doubt that the sense of life became clear to them have then been
unable to say what constituted that sense?)


6.522 There are, indeed, things that cannot be put into words. They make
themselves manifest. They are what is mystical.


6.53 The correct method in philosophy would really be the following: to say
nothing except what can be said, i.e. propositions of natural science--i.e.
something that has nothing to do with philosophy -- and then, whenever
someone else wanted to say something metaphysical, to demonstrate to him
that he had failed to give a meaning to certain signs in his propositions.
Although it would not be satisfying to the other person--he would not have
the feeling that we were teaching him philosophy--this method would be the
only strictly correct one.


6.54 My propositions are elucidatory in this way: he who understands me
finally recognizes them as senseless, when he has climbed out through them,
on them, over them. (He must so to speak throw away the ladder, after he
has climbed up on it.) He must transcend these propositions, and then he
will see the world aright.
