3 A logical picture of facts is a thought.


3.001 'A state of affairs is thinkable': what this means is that we can
picture it to ourselves.


3.01 The totality of true thoughts is a picture of the world.


3.02 A thought contains the possibility of the situation of which it is the
thought. What is thinkable is possible too.


3.03 Thought can never be of anything illogical, since, if it were, we
should have to think illogically.


3.031 It used to be said that God could create anything except what would
be contrary to the laws of logic.The truth is that we could not say what an
'illogical' world would look like.


3.032 It is as impossible to represent in language anything that
'contradicts logic' as it is in geometry to represent by its coordinates a
figure that contradicts the laws of space, or to give the coordinates of a
point that does not exist.


3.0321 Though a state of affairs that would contravene the laws of physics
can be represented by us spatially, one that would contravene the laws of
geometry cannot.


3.04 It a thought were correct a priori, it would be a thought whose
possibility ensured its truth.


3.05 A priori knowledge that a thought was true would be possible only it
its truth were recognizable from the thought itself (without anything a to
compare it with).


3.1 In a proposition a thought finds an expression that can be perceived by
the senses.


3.11 We use the perceptible sign of a proposition (spoken or written, etc.)
as a projection of a possible situation. The method of projection is to
think of the sense of the proposition.


3.12 I call the sign with which we express a thought a propositional
sign.And a proposition is a propositional sign in its projective relation
to the world.


3.13 A proposition, therefore, does not actually contain its sense, but
does contain the possibility of expressing it. ('The content of a
proposition' means the content of a proposition that has sense.) A
proposition contains the form, but not the content, of its sense.


3.14 What constitutes a propositional sign is that in its elements (the
words) stand in a determinate relation to one another. A propositional sign
is a fact.


3.141 A proposition is not a blend of words.(Just as a theme in music is
not a blend of notes.) A proposition is articulate.


3.142 Only facts can express a sense, a set of names cannot.


3.143 Although a propositional sign is a fact, this is obscured by the
usual form of expression in writing or print. For in a printed proposition,
for example, no essential difference is apparent between a propositional
sign and a word. (That is what made it possible for Frege to call a
proposition a composite name.)


3.1431 The essence of a propositional sign is very clearly seen if we
imagine one composed of spatial objects (such as tables, chairs, and books)
instead of written signs.


3.1432 Instead of, 'The complex sign "aRb" says that a stands to b in the
relation R' we ought to put, 'That "a" stands to "b" in a certain relation
says that aRb.'


3.144 Situations can be described but not given names.


3.2 In a proposition a thought can be expressed in such a way that elements
of the propositional sign correspond to the objects of the thought.


3.201 I call such elements 'simple signs', and such a proposition 'complete
analysed'.


3.202 The simple signs employed in propositions are called names.


3.203 A name means an object. The object is its meaning. ('A' is the same
sign as 'A'.)


3.21 The configuration of objects in a situation corresponds to the
configuration of simple signs in the propositional sign.


3.221 Objects can only be named. Signs are their representatives. I can
only speak about them: I cannot put them into words. Propositions can only
say how things are, not what they are.


3.23 The requirement that simple signs be possible is the requirement that
sense be determinate.


3.24 A proposition about a complex stands in an internal relation to a
proposition about a constituent of the complex. A complex can be given only
by its description, which will be right or wrong. A proposition that
mentions a complex will not be nonsensical, if the complex does not exits,
but simply false. When a propositional element signifies a complex, this
can be seen from an indeterminateness in the propositions in which it
occurs. In such cases we know that the proposition leaves something
undetermined. (In fact the notation for generality contains a prototype.)
The contraction of a symbol for a complex into a simple symbol can be
expressed in a definition.


3.25 A proposition cannot be dissected any further by means of a
definition: it is a primitive sign.


3.261 Every sign that has a definition signifies via the signs that serve
to define it; and the definitions point the way. Two signs cannot signify
in the same manner if one is primitive and the other is defined by means of
primitive signs. Names cannot be anatomized by means of definitions. (Nor
can any sign that has a meaning independently and on its own.)


3.262 What signs fail to express, their application shows. What signs slur
over, their application says clearly.


3.263 The meanings of primitive signs can be explained by means of
elucidations. Elucidations are propositions that stood if the meanings of
those signs are already known.


3.3 Only propositions have sense; only in the nexus of a proposition does a
name have meaning.


3.31 I call any part of a proposition that characterizes its sense an
expression (or a symbol). (A proposition is itself an expression.)
Everything essential to their sense that propositions can have in common
with one another is an expression. An expression is the mark of a form and
a content.


3.311 An expression presupposes the forms of all the propositions in which
it can occur. It is the common characteristic mark of a class of
propositions.


3.312 It is therefore presented by means of the general form of the
propositions that it characterizes. In fact, in this form the expression
will be constant and everything else variable.


3.313 Thus an expression is presented by means of a variable whose values
are the propositions that contain the expression. (In the limiting case the
variable becomes a constant, the expression becomes a proposition.) I call
such a variable a 'propositional variable'.


3.314 An expression has meaning only in a proposition. All variables can be
construed as propositional variables. (Even variable names.)


3.315 If we turn a constituent of a proposition into a variable, there is a
class of propositions all of which are values of the resulting variable
proposition. In general, this class too will be dependent on the meaning
that our arbitrary conventions have given to parts of the original
proposition. But if all the signs in it that have arbitrarily determined
meanings are turned into variables, we shall still get a class of this
kind. This one, however, is not dependent on any convention, but solely on
the nature of the pro position. It corresponds to a logical form--a logical
prototype.


3.316 What values a propositional variable may take is something that is
stipulated. The stipulation of values is the variable.


3.317 To stipulate values for a propositional variable is to give the
propositions whose common characteristic the variable is. The stipulation
is a description of those propositions. The stipulation will therefore be
concerned only with symbols, not with their meaning. And the only thing
essential to the stipulation is that it is merely a description of symbols
and states nothing about what is signified. How the description of the
propositions is produced is not essential.


3.318 Like Frege and Russell I construe a proposition as a function of the
expressions contained in it.


3.32 A sign is what can be perceived of a symbol.


3.321 So one and the same sign (written or spoken, etc.) can be common to
two different symbols--in which case they will signify in different ways.


3.322 Our use of the same sign to signify two different objects can never
indicate a common characteristic of the two, if we use it with two
different modes of signification. For the sign, of course, is arbitrary. So
we could choose two different signs instead, and then what would be left in
common on the signifying side?


3.323 In everyday language it very frequently happens that the same word
has different modes of signification--and so belongs to different symbols--
or that two words that have different modes of signification are employed
in propositions in what is superficially the same way. Thus the word 'is'
figures as the copula, as a sign for identity, and as an expression for
existence; 'exist' figures as an intransitive verb like 'go', and
'identical' as an adjective; we speak of something, but also of something's
happening. (In the proposition, 'Green is green'--where the first word is
the proper name of a person and the last an adjective--these words do not
merely have different meanings: they are different symbols.)


3.324 In this way the most fundamental confusions are easily produced (the
whole of philosophy is full of them).


3.325 In order to avoid such errors we must make use of a sign-language
that excludes them by not using the same sign for different symbols and by
not using in a superficially similar way signs that have different modes of
signification: that is to say, a sign-language that is governed by logical
grammar--by logical syntax. (The conceptual notation of Frege and Russell
is such a language, though, it is true, it fails to exclude all mistakes.)


3.326 In order to recognize a symbol by its sign we must observe how it is
used with a sense.


3.327 A sign does not determine a logical form unless it is taken together
with its logico-syntactical employment.


3.328 If a sign is useless, it is meaningless. That is the point of Occam's
maxim. (If everything behaves as if a sign had meaning, then it does have
meaning.)


3.33 In logical syntax the meaning of a sign should never play a role. It
must be possible to establish logical syntax without mentioning the meaning
of a sign: only the description of expressions may be presupposed.


3.331 From this observation we turn to Russell's 'theory of types'. It can
be seen that Russell must be wrong, because he had to mention the meaning
of signs when establishing the rules for them.


3.332 No proposition can make a statement about itself, because a
propositional sign cannot be contained in itself (that is the whole of the
'theory of types').


3.333 The reason why a function cannot be its own argument is that the sign
for a function already contains the prototype of its argument, and it
cannot contain itself. For let us suppose that the function F(fx) could be
its own argument: in that case there would be a proposition 'F(F(fx))', in
which the outer function F and the inner function F must have different
meanings, since the inner one has the form O(f(x)) and the outer one has
the form Y(O(fx)). Only the letter 'F' is common to the two functions, but
the letter by itself signifies nothing. This immediately becomes clear if
instead of 'F(Fu)' we write '(do) : F(Ou) . Ou = Fu'. That disposes of
Russell's paradox.


3.334 The rules of logical syntax must go without saying, once we know how
each individual sign signifies.


3.34 A proposition possesses essential and accidental features. Accidental
features are those that result from the particular way in which the
propositional sign is produced. Essential features are those without which
the proposition could not express its sense.


3.341 So what is essential in a proposition is what all propositions that
can express the same sense have in common. And similarly, in general, what
is essential in a symbol is what all symbols that can serve the same
purpose have in common.


3.3411 So one could say that the real name of an object was what all
symbols that signified it had in common. Thus, one by one, all kinds of
composition would prove to be unessential to a name.


3.342 Although there is something arbitrary in our notations, this much is
not arbitrary--that when we have determined one thing arbitrarily,
something else is necessarily the case. (This derives from the essence of
notation.)


3.3421 A particular mode of signifying may be unimportant but it is always
important that it is a possible mode of signifying. And that is generally
so in philosophy: again and again the individual case turns out to be
unimportant, but the possibility of each individual case discloses
something about the essence of the world.


3.343 Definitions are rules for translating from one language into another.
Any correct sign-language must be translatable into any other in accordance
with such rules: it is this that they all have in common.


3.344 What signifies in a symbol is what is common to all the symbols that
the rules of logical syntax allow us to substitute for it.


3.3441 For instance, we can express what is common to all notations for
truth-functions in the following way: they have in common that, for
example, the notation that uses 'Pp' ('not p') and 'p C g' ('p or g') can
be substituted for any of them. (This serves to characterize the way in
which something general can be disclosed by the possibility of a specific
notation.)


3.3442 Nor does analysis resolve the sign for a complex in an arbitrary
way, so that it would have a different resolution every time that it was
incorporated in a different proposition.


3.4 A proposition determines a place in logical space. The existence of
this logical place is guaranteed by the mere existence of the constituents--
by the existence of the proposition with a sense.


3.41 The propositional sign with logical co-ordinates--that is the logical
place.


3.411 In geometry and logic alike a place is a possibility: something can
exist in it.


3.42 A proposition can determine only one place in logical space:
nevertheless the whole of logical space must already be given by it.
(Otherwise negation, logical sum, logical product, etc., would introduce
more and more new elements in co-ordination.) (The logical scaffolding
surrounding a picture determines logical space. The force of a proposition
reaches through the whole of logical space.)


3.5 A propositional sign, applied and thought out, is a thought.
