Title: Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus (Excerpts)
Author: Ludwig Wittgenstein

1 The world is everything that is the case.
1.1 The world is the totality of facts, not of things.
1.11 The world is determined by the facts, and by these being all the facts.
1.12 For the totality of facts determines both what is the case, and also all that is not the case.
1.13 The facts in logical space are the world.
1.2 The world divides into facts.
1.21 Any one can either be the case or not be the case, and everything else remain the same.

2 What is the case, the fact, is the existence of atomic facts.
2.01 An atomic fact is a combination of objects (entities, things).
2.011 It is essential to a thing that it can be a constituent part of an atomic fact.
2.012 In logic nothing is accidental: if a thing can occur in an atomic fact the possibility of that atomic fact must already be prejudged in the thing.

3 The logical picture of the facts is the thought.
3.001 "An atomic fact is thinkable"—means: we can imagine it.
3.01 The totality of true thoughts is a picture of the world.
3.02 The thought contains the possibility of the state of affairs which it thinks. What is thinkable is also possible.
3.03 We cannot think anything unlogical, for otherwise we should have to think unlogically.

4 The thought is the significant proposition.
4.001 The totality of propositions is the language.
4.002 Man possesses the capacity of constructing languages, in which every sense can be expressed, without having an idea how and what each word means—just as one speaks without knowing how the single sounds are produced.
Colloquial language is a part of the human organism and is not less complicated than it.
From it it is humanly impossible to gather immediately the logic of language.
Language disguises the thought; so that from the external form of the clothes one cannot infer the form of the thought they clothe, because the external form of the clothes is constructed with quite another object than to let the form of the body be recognized.
The silent adjustments to understand colloquial language are enormously complicated.

5 Propositions are truth-functions of elementary propositions.
(An elementary proposition is a truth-function of itself.)
5.6 The limits of my language mean the limits of my world.

6.4 All propositions are of equal value.
6.41 The sense of the world must lie outside the world. In the world everything is as it is and happens as it does happen. In it there is no value—and if there were, it would be of no value.
If there is a value which is of value, it must lie outside all happening and being-so. For all happening and being-so is accidental.
What makes it non-accidental cannot lie in the world, for otherwise this would again be accidental.
It must lie outside the world.
6.522 There is indeed the inexpressible. This shows itself; it is the mystical.

7 Whereof one cannot speak, thereof one must be silent.


Title: Philosophical Investigations (Excerpts)
Author: Ludwig Wittgenstein

1. "Explanations come to an end somewhere."

2. "For a large class of cases—though not for all—in which we employ the word 'meaning' it can be defined thus: the meaning of a word is its use in the language."

3. "Philosophy is a battle against the bewitchment of our intelligence by means of language."

4. "A picture held us captive. And we could not get outside it, for it lay in our language and language seemed to repeat it to us inexorably."

5. "What is your aim in philosophy?—To shew the fly the way out of the fly-bottle."

6. "If a lion could speak, we could not understand him."

7. "The results of philosophy are the uncovering of one or another piece of plain nonsense and of bumps that the understanding has got by running its head against the limits of language. These bumps make us see the value of the discovery."

8. "Language is a labyrinth of paths. You approach from one side and know your way about; you approach the same place from another side and no longer know your way about."

9. "We want to walk: so we need friction. Back to the rough ground!"

10. "Don't think, but look!"
