Greetings from Seneca to his friend Lucilius.

Wherever I turn, I see evidences of my advancing years. I visited lately my country-place, and complained of the money which was being squandered on the building. My bailiff (who, since I last saw him, has grown into an old man) maintained that it was not due to any carelessness on his part, but that he was doing everything possible, and that the house was old. And this was the house which grew under my own hands! What has the future in store for me, if stones of my own age are already crumbling?

I was angry, and I said: "It is clear that these plane-trees are neglected; they have no leaves. Their branches are so gnarled and shrivelled; the boles are so rough and dead! This would not happen, if someone loosened the earth at their feet, and watered them." The bailiff swore by my protecting genius that he was doing everything possible, and never relaxed his efforts, but that those trees were old. Between you and me, I had planted them myself, I had seen their first leaf.

Then I turned to the door and asked: "Who is that broken-down dotard? You have done well to place him at the entrance; for he is outward bound. Where did you get him? What pleasure did it give you to take up for burial some other man's dead?" But the old man said: "Don't you know me, sir? I am Felicio; you used to bring me little images. I am the son of Philositus the steward, your pet playmate." "Surely," said I, "this man is raving. My playmate has become a dotard, has he? He might well be; for he is shedding his teeth."

I must therefore owe it to my country-place that my old age has become apparent whithersoever I turn. Let us cherish and love old age; for it is full of pleasure if one knows how to use it. Fruits are most welcome when the tree is just reaching the end of its bearing; youth is most charming at its close; the last drink is the one which gives the toper his glass; every pleasure defers its greatest delights to the closing moments.

It is the sweetest thing in the world to have tired of life, and to have finished it; or rather, I should say, to have ceased desiring it. For desire is a troublesome thing, and a restless one.

"But," you say, "it is irksome to have death always before one's eyes." To this I reply: first, that old age has death before its eyes, and youth has death behind its back; for death pursues the young, but lies in wait for the old. And second, that no one is so old that he may not hope for one day more; and one day is a stage of life.

Life is not a matter of years, but of content.

Farewell.
