Chapter 1
The Tao that can be told is not the eternal Tao.
The name that can be named is not the eternal name.
The nameless is the beginning of heaven and earth.
The named is the mother of ten thousand things.
Ever desireless, one can see the mystery.
Ever desiring, one can see the manifestations.
These two spring from the same source but differ in name;
this appears as darkness.
Darkness within darkness.
The gate to all mystery.

Chapter 8
The highest good is like water.
Water gives life to the ten thousand things and does not strive.
It flows in places men reject and so is like the Tao.
In dwelling, be close to the land.
In meditation, go deep in the heart.
In dealing with others, be gentle and kind.
In speech, be true.
In ruling, be just.
In business, be competent.
In action, watch the timing.
No contention: No blame.

Chapter 11
Thirty spokes share the wheel's hub;
It is the center hole that makes it useful.
Shape clay into a vessel;
It is the space within that makes it useful.
Cut doors and windows for a room;
It is the holes which make it useful.
Therefore benefit comes from what is there;
Usefulness from what is not there.

Chapter 25
Something formless and perfect
before the universe was born.
Silent and empty.
Standing alone and changing not.
Moving around without peril.
It may be considered the Mother of the world.
I do not know its name; I call it Tao.
If forced to give it a name, I shall call it Great.
Being great implies flowing.
Flowing implies reaching far.
Reaching far implies returning.
Therefore the Tao is great;
Heaven is great.
Earth is great.
The King is also great.
These are the four great powers of the universe,
and the King is one of them.
Man follows Earth.
Earth follows Heaven.
Heaven follows the Tao.
Tao follows what is natural.

Chapter 42
The Tao begot one.
One begot two.
Two begot three.
And three begot the ten thousand things.
The ten thousand things carry yin and embrace yang.
They achieve harmony by combining these forces.
What men hate is to be orphaned, widowed, or worthless,
But this is how kings and lords describe themselves.
For one gains by losing
And loses by gaining.
What others teach, I also teach; that is:
"A violent man will die a violent death!"
This will be the essence of my teaching.

Chapter 64
What is rooted is easy to nourish.
What is recent is easy to correct.
What is brittle is easy to break.
What is small is easy to scatter.
Prevent trouble before it arises.
Put things in order before they exist.
The giant pine tree grows from a tiny sprout.
The journey of a thousand miles starts from beneath your feet.
A rushing river begins as a drop.
Do not think lightly of good, that "it is nothing."
Will a water pot be filled by drops of water?
It is by the accumulation of drops that it is filled.
Do not think lightly of evil, that "it is nothing."
Will a pitcher be filled by drops of water?
It is by the accumulation of drops that it is filled.
The sage does not attempt anything very big,
and thus achieves greatness.

Chapter 81
True words are not beautiful;
Beautiful words are not true.
Good words are not persuasive;
Persuasive words are not good.
The wise are not learned;
The learned are not wise.
The sage does not hoard.
The more he helps others, the more he benefits himself,
The more he gives to others, the more he gets himself.
The Way of Heaven does one good but never does one harm.
The Way of the Sage is to act but not to compete.
