Much learning does not teach one to have understanding, else it would have taught Hesiod and Pythagoras, and again Xenophanes and Hecataeus.
Pythagoras, son of Mnesarchus, practised investigation most of all men, and having chosen out these treatises, he made a wisdom of his own--much learning and bad art.
Hesiod is a teacher of the masses. They suppose him to have possessed the greatest knowledge, who indeed did not know day and night. For they are one.
The harmony of the world is a harmony of oppositions, as in the case of the bow and of the lyre.
The most approved of those who are of repute knows how to cheat. Nevertheless, justice will catch the makers and witnesses of lies.
Homer deserved to be driven out of the lists and flogged, and Archilochus likewise.
A man's character is his daemon.
Night-roamers, Magians, bacchanals, revelers in wine, the initiated.
For the things which are considered mysteries among men, they celebrate sacrilegiously.
And to these images they pray, as if one should prattle with the houses knowing nothing of gods or heroes, who they are.
I distinguish two kinds of sacrifices. First, those of men wholly purified, such as would rarely happen in the case of a single individual... Second, material and corporeal sacrifices...
When defiled, they purify themselves with blood, just as if any one who had fallen into the mud should wash himself with mud!
The majority of people have no understanding of the things with which they daily meet, nor, when instructed, do they have any right knowledge of them, although to themselves they seem to have.
Eyes and ears are bad witnesses to men having rude souls.
Whatever concerns seeing, hearing, and learning, I particularly honor.
The eyes are more exact witnesses than the ears.
Of all whose words I have heard, no one attains to this, to know that wisdom is apart from all.
Gold-seekers dig over much earth and find little gold.
Debate.
Nature loves to conceal herself.
The God whose oracle is at Delphi neither speaks plainly nor conceals, but indicates by signs.
But the Sibyl with raging mouth uttering things solemn, rude and unadorned, reaches with her voice over a thousand years, because of the God.
