Eyes and ears are bad witnesses to men having rude souls.

The majority of people have no understanding of the things with which they daily meet, nor, when instructed, do they have any right knowledge of them, although to themselves they seem to have.

Gold-seekers dig over much earth and find little gold.

The God whose oracle is at Delphi neither speaks plainly nor conceals, but indicates by signs.

Whatever concerns seeing, hearing, and learning, I particularly honor.

The eyes are more exact witnesses than the ears.

Much learning does not teach one to have understanding, else it would have taught Hesiod and Pythagoras, and again Xenophanes and Hecataeus.

Pythagoras, son of Mnesarchus, practised investigation most of all men, and having chosen out these treatises, he made a wisdom of his own--much learning and bad art.

Craving and Satiety.

The sun will not overstep his bounds, for if he does, the Erinyes, helpers of justice, will find him out.

Time is a child playing at draughts, a child's kingdom.

Let us not draw conclusions rashly about the greatest things.

The hidden harmony is better than the visible.

The beginning and end are common.

The limits of the soul you would not find out, though you should traverse every way.

A man when he is drunken is led by a beardless youth, stumbling, ignorant where he is going, having a wet soul.

The dry soul is the wisest and best.

Living and dead, awake and asleep, young and old, are the same. For these several states are transmutations of each other.

Corpses are more worthless than excrement.

Being born, they will only to live and die, or rather to find rest, and they leave children who likewise are to die.

In thirty years a man may become a grandfather.

Although the Law of Reason is common, the majority of people live as though they had an understanding of their own.

To those who are awake, there is one world in common, but of those who are asleep, each is withdrawn to a private world of his own.

For human nature does not possess understanding, but the divine does.

The thoughtless man understands the voice of the Deity as little as the child understands the man.

Greater fates gain greater rewards.

For men to have whatever they wish, would not be well. Sickness makes health pleasant and good; hunger, satiety; weariness, rest.

It is better to conceal ignorance, but it is hard to do so in relaxation and over wine.

It is law, also, to obey the will of one.

In Priene there lived Bias, son of Teutamus, whose word was worth more than that of others.

To me, one is ten thousand if he be the best.

Dogs, also, bark at what they do not know.

A stupid man loves to be puzzled by every discourse.

A man's character is his daemon.

Night-roamers, Magians, bacchanals, revelers in wine, the initiated.

For the things which are considered mysteries among men, they celebrate sacrilegiously.

Atonements.

When defiled, they purify themselves with blood, just as if any one who had fallen into the mud should wash himself with mud!
