The way up and the way down are one and the same.
It is not possible to step twice into the same river.
This world, which is the same for all, no one of gods or men has made; but it was ever, is now, and ever shall be an ever-living Fire, with measures of it kindling, and measures going out.
All things are an exchange for Fire, and Fire for all things, even as wares for gold and gold for wares.
Listening not to me but to the Logos it is wise to agree that all things are one.
Thinking is common to all.
The sun is new every day.
Eyes and ears are bad witnesses for men if they have barbarian souls.
Nature loves to hide.
The hidden harmony is better than the obvious.
Men do not know how what is at variance agrees with itself. It is an attunement of opposite tensions, like that of the bow and the lyre.
Couples are things whole and things not whole, what is drawn together and what is drawn asunder, the harmonious and the discordant. The one is made up of all things, and all things issue from the one.
God is day and night, winter and summer, war and peace, surfeit and hunger; but he takes various shapes, just as fire, when it is mingled with spices, is named according to the savor of each.
War is the father of all and the king of all; and some he has made gods and some men, some bond and some free.
To God all things are fair and good and right, but men hold some things wrong and some right.
Man is kindled and put out like a light in the night.
The waking have one common world, but the sleeping turn aside each into a world of his own.
Dogs bark at every one they do not know.
Fools when they do hear are like the deaf: of them does the saying bear witness that they are absent when present.
They do not understand how that which differs with itself is in agreement: harmony consists of opposing tension, like that of the bow and the lyre.
Time is a child playing a game of draughts; the kingship is in the hands of a child.
The sea is the purest and impurest water. Fish can drink it and it is good for them, to men it is undrinkable and destructive.
Swine wash in the mire, and barnyard fowls in dust.
Every beast is driven to pasture with blows.
A man's character is his fate.
Even sleepers are workers and collaborators in what goes on in the universe.
It is better to hide our ignorance than to expose it.
The most beautiful order of the world is still a heap of sweepings piled up at random.
To be temperate is the greatest virtue. Wisdom consists in speaking the truth and in acting in accordance with nature while listening to it.
All things flow, nothing stands still.
We step and do not step into the same rivers; we are and are not.
I have searched myself.
The lord whose is the oracle at Delphos neither utters nor hides his meaning, but shows it by a sign.
For it is not possible to enter the same river twice, nor to touch twice the same mortal substance in the same state, but by reason of the swiftness and speed of its change, it scatters and gathers, it comes and goes.
We must not act and speak like men asleep.
One to me is as ten thousand, if he be the best.
If you do not expect the unexpected, you will not find it; for it is hard to be sought out and difficult.
Immortals are mortal, mortals are immortal, living their death and dying their life.
The people must fight for its law as for its walls.
Fire lives the death of air, and air lives the death of fire; water lives the death of earth, earth that of water.
Everything flows and nothing stays.
You cannot step twice into the same river.
Change is the only constant.
Much learning does not teach understanding.
The soul is a spider that sits in the middle of its web, the body.
Bigotry is the sacred disease.
Those who are awake have a world in common, but every sleeper has a world of his own.
Man is most nearly himself when he achieves the seriousness of a child at play.
Stupidity is better kept a secret than displayed.
There is nothing permanent except change.
The unlike is joined together, and from differences results the most beautiful harmony.
The road up and the road down is one and the same.
The eyes are more exact witnesses than the ears.
A man's character is his guardian divinity.
The sun will not overstep his measures; if he does, the Erinyes, the handmaids of Justice, will find him out.
If happiness consisted in the pleasures of the body, we should call oxen happy when they find vetch to eat.
It is hard to fight with anger; for what it wants it buys at the price of soul.
In the circumference of a circle the beginning and end are common.
Physicians who cut, burn, stab and rack the sick, demand a fee for it which they do not deserve to get.
Joints: whole and not whole, connected-separate, consonant-dissonant.
Whosoever wishes to know about the world must learn about it in its particular details.
Knowledge is not intelligence.
Unless you expect the unexpected you will never find truth, for it is hard to discover and hard to attain.
Abundance is a lack.
To be evenminded is the greatest virtue.
Wisdom is the oneness of mind that guides and permeates all things.
Those who seek gold dig up much earth and find little.
Let us not make random conjectures about the greatest matters.
Of all whose discourses I have heard, there is not one who attains to understanding that wisdom is apart from all.
Men that love wisdom must be acquainted with very many things.
The Sibyl, with raving lips uttering things mirthless, unbedizened, and unperfumed, reaches over a thousand years with her voice, thanks to the god in her.
The most excellent men prefer one thing above all others: eternal glory to mortal things; but the many are glutted like cattle.
Donkeys prefer straw to gold.
A foolish man is a-flutter at every word.
It is better to be extinguished than to be a tyrant.
The best of men choose one thing above all others: immortal glory among mortals; but the masses stuff themselves like cattle.
One day is equal to every day.
Everything changes and nothing stands still.
Cold things become warm, and what is warm cools; what is wet dries, and the parched is moistened.
They do not step into the same rivers.
We are and we are not.
Corpses are more fit to be thrown out than dung.
The universe, which is the same for all, has not been made by any god or man, but it always has been, is, and will be an ever-living fire, kindling itself by regular measures and going out by regular measures.
The death of fire is the birth of air, and the death of air is the birth of water.
God is day night, winter summer, war peace, satiety hunger; he undergoes alteration in the way that fire, when it is mixed with spices, is named according to the scent of each of them.
For the waking there is one common and objective world, but the sleepers turn aside each into a world of his own.
They are estranged from that with which they have most constant intercourse.
It is wise to listen, not to me but to the Word, and to confess that all things are one.
Thinking is common to all.
Those who speak with understanding must hold fast to what is common to all as a city holds fast to its law, and even more strongly.
For all human laws are fed by the one divine law.
The path of writing is crooked and straight.
We must not act and speak like men asleep.
The hidden harmony is better than the obvious.
Nature loves to hide.
War is the father of all and the king of all.
Homer was wrong in saying: 'Would that strife might perish from among gods and men!' He did not see that he was praying for the destruction of the universe; for, if his prayer were heard, all things would pass away.
The bow (biós) is called life (bíos), but its work is death.
The people must fight for its law as for its walls.
Character is destiny.
There is a greater need to extinguish hybris than a blazing fire.
It is better to hide ignorance, but it is hard to do so in relaxation and over wine.
The most beautiful ape is ugly compared to man.
The wisest man is an ape compared to God.
A man is found to be childish by a divinity, just as a child is by a man.
To God all things are beautiful and good and just, but men have assumed some things to be unjust and others just.
The way of man has no wisdom, but that of God has.
Time is a game played beautifully by children.
I searched for myself.
Eyes are more accurate witnesses than ears.
Eyes and ears are bad witnesses for men who have barbarian souls.
Much learning does not teach understanding.
Pythagoras, son of Mnesarchus, practiced inquiry more than any other man, and selecting from these writings he made a wisdom of his own—a polymathy, a bad art.
To be wise is one thing: to know the thought that steers all things through all things.
God is day and night, winter and summer, war and peace, satiety and hunger.
All things are an exchange for fire, and fire for all things.
This world-order [kosmos], the same of all, no god nor man did create, but it ever was and is and will be: everliving fire, kindling in measures and being quenched in measures.
The sea is the most pure and the most polluted water; for fishes it is drinkable and salutary, but for men it is undrinkable and deleterious.
Immortals are mortal, mortals are immortal, living their death and dying their life.
Lifetime is a child at play, moving pieces in a game. Kingship belongs to the child.
We step into and we do not step into the same rivers. We are and we are not.
It is hard to fight with anger; for what it wants it buys at the price of the soul.
For those who are awake the cosmos is one and common, but those who sleep turn away each into a private world.
One must not act and speak like sleepers.
We ought not to act and speak like children of our parents.
The name of the bow is life, but its work is death.
Hidden harmony is better than the obvious one.
Men who love wisdom should acquaint themselves with a great many particulars.
Thinking is a sacred disease and sight is deceptive.
Let us not conjecture at random about the greatest things.
The sun is the breadth of a human foot.
Every beast is driven to pasture with blows.
The most beautiful order of the world is like a heap of random sweepings.
Combinations: Whole and not whole, united and separated, consonant and dissonant; from all things one and from one all things.
Couples are things whole and things not whole.
Whatever comes from sight, hearing, learning from experience: this I prefer.
Eyes and ears are poor witnesses to people if they have uncultured souls.
One day is like any other.
Man's character is his fate.
You could not find the ends of the soul though you traveled every way, so deep is its measure [logos].
Self-control is the highest virtue, and wisdom is to speak truth and consciously to act according to nature.
All things come into being by conflict of opposites.
Everything flows.
Nothing endures but change.
There is nothing permanent except change.
We enter and do not enter the same rivers, we are and we are not.
Bigotry is the sacred disease.
The waking have one world in common; sleepers have each a private world of his own.
Dogs bark at what they don't understand.
Fools, although they hear, are like the deaf: To them the adage applies that when present they are absent.
The beginning and the end are common.
Upward, downward, the way is one and the same.
The eyes are more exact witnesses than the ears.
Character is destiny.
Whatever is contrary is useful.
Invisible harmony is better than visible.
Nature loves to hide.
War is the father of all.
God is day and night, winter and summer, war and peace, surfeit and hunger.
Men do not know how what is at variance agrees with itself. It is an attunement of opposite tensions, like that of the bow and the lyre.
Thinking is common to all.
Wisdom is to speak the truth and act in keeping with nature.
Moderation is the greatest virtue.
A man's character is his fate.
No man ever steps in the same river twice, for it's not the same river and he's not the same man.
The only thing that is constant is change.
Only the variable is constant.
Change is the only constant.
Everything changes and nothing remains still.
Everything flows and nothing abides.
You cannot step twice into the same river.
It is in changing that things find repose.
Start and end are common.
Up and down are the same.
The way up and the way down are one and the same.
Opposites cooperate.
The fairest harmony is born of things different.
All things come into being by conflict.
War is the father and king of all.
Strife is justice.
God is day night, winter summer, war peace, satiety hunger.
Men do not understand how that which is torn apart agrees with itself.
The hidden harmony is better than the obvious.
Nature loves to hide.
Eyes and ears are bad witnesses to men if they have barbarian souls.
Much learning does not teach understanding.
To be wise is one thing: to know the thought that steers all things through all things.
The world, the same for all, has not been made by any god or man.
Fire is the element of all things.
All things are an exchange for fire, and fire for all things.
I have searched myself.
Character is destiny.
Time is a child playing a game of draughts.
The way of man has no wisdom, but that of God has.
Man is most nearly himself when he achieves the seriousness of a child at play.
Stupidity is better kept a secret than displayed.
To be evenminded is the greatest virtue.
Dogs bark at every one they do not know.
One to me is as ten thousand, if he be the best.
If you do not expect the unexpected, you will not find it.
It is better to hide our ignorance than to expose it.
The sun is new every day.
Everything flows.
Panta Rhei.
