For even the best of them choose one thing above all others, immortal glory among mortals, while most of them are glutted like beasts.

For what thought or wisdom have they? They follow the poets and take the crowd as their teacher, knowing not that there are many bad and few good.

The Ephesians would do well to hang themselves, every grown man of them, and leave the city to beardless lads; for they have cast out Hermodoros, the best man among them, saying, "We will have none who is best among us; if there be any such, let him be so elsewhere and among others."

They vainly purify themselves by defiling themselves with blood, just as if one were to wash his feet in mud. Any man who marked him doing thus, would deem him mad. And they pray to these images, as if one were to talk with a man's house, knowing not what gods or heroes are.

The sun is the width of a human foot.

Asses would rather have straw than gold.

Every beast is driven to pasture with blows.

...to delight in the mire.

The mysteries practised among men are unholy mysteries.

The many do not take heed of such things as those they meet with, nor do they mark them when they are taught, though they think they do.

When they are born, they wish to live and to meet with their dooms—or rather to rest—and they leave children behind them to meet with their dooms in turn.

The most esteemed of them knows but fancies, and holds fast to them, yet of a truth justice shall overtake the artificers of lies and the false witnesses.

Thales foretold an eclipse.

Men that love wisdom must be acquainted with very many things indeed.

Swine wash in the mire, and barnyard fowls in dust.

The learning of many things teacheth not understanding, else would it have taught Hesiod and Pythagoras, and again Xenophanes and Hekataios.

Homer should be turned out of the lists and whipped, and Archilochos likewise.

Let us not conjecture at random about the greatest things.

Men allow themselves to be deceived as Homer was, who yet was wiser than all the Greeks; for some boys killing lice deceived him saying, "What we see and catch we leave behind; what we neither see nor catch we take with us."

Hesiod is most men's teacher. Men are sure he knew very many things, a man who did not know day or night! They are one.

Physicians who cut, burn, stab, and rack the sick, demand a fee for it which they do not deserve to get.

A little better, then, Heraclitus has considered human opinions to be children's toys.

Think too of him who forgets where the way leads.

They are estranged from that with which they have most constant intercourse.

It is not meet to act and speak like men asleep.

We ought not [behave] like children who learn from their parents.

Those who are asleep are fellow-workers (in what goes on in the world).

The way of man has no wisdom, but that of God has.

Man is called a baby by God, even as a child by a man.

We must know that war is common to all and strife is justice, and that all things come into being and pass away (?) through strife.

The wise man is not known because of men's want of belief.

The fool is fluttered at every word.

The waking have one common world, but the sleeping turn aside each into a world of his own.

And the Sibyl, with raving lips uttering things mirthless, unbedizened, and unperfumed, reaches over a thousand years with her voice, thanks to the god in her.

It is best to hide folly; but it is hard in times of relaxation, over our cups.

Corpses are more fit to be cast out than dung.

Dogs bark at every one they do not know.

I have sought for myself.

The eyes are more exact witnesses than ears.

To God all things are fair and good and right, but men hold some things wrong and some right.

It is not good for men to get all they wish to get. It is sickness that makes health pleasant; evil, good; hunger, plenty; weariness, rest.

Self-control is the highest virtue, and wisdom is to speak truth and consciously to act according to nature.

It pertains to all men to know themselves and to learn self-control.

A man, when he gets drunk, is led by a beardless lad, tripping, knowing not where he steps, having his soul moist.

Man's character is his fate.

Even the posset separates if it is not stirred.

Pythagoras, son of Mnesarchos, practised scientific inquiry beyond all other men, and making a selection of these writings, claimed for his own wisdom what was but a knowledge of many things and an imposture.
