How can one escape that which never sets?
Souls smell in Hades.
Death is what we see waking. What we see in sleep is a dream.
To souls it is death to become water, and to water it is death to become earth, but from earth comes water, and from water, soul.
The limits of the soul you would not find out, though you should traverse every way.
To souls it is joy to become wet.
A man when he is drunken is led by a beardless youth, stumbling, ignorant where he is going, having a wet soul.
The dry soul is the wisest and best.
Man, as a light at night, is lighted and extinguished.
Living and dead, awake and asleep, young and old, are the same. For these several states are transmutations of each other.
Time is a child playing at draughts, a child's kingdom.
Corpses are more worthless than excrement.
Being born, they will only to live and die, or rather to find rest, and they leave children who likewise are to die.
The wisest of men compared with God appears an ape in wisdom and in beauty and in all other things.
The most beautiful of apes is ugly when compared with another kind, and the most beautiful of earthen pots is ugly when compared with maidenkind.
Greater fates gain greater rewards.
It is hard to contend against passion, for whatever it craves it buys with its life.
It pertains to all men to know themselves and to learn self-control.
Self-control is the highest virtue, and wisdom is to speak truth and consciously to act according to nature.
It is law, also, to obey the will of one.
A stupid man loves to be puzzled by every discourse.
There awaits men after death what they neither hope nor think.
And those that are there shall arise and become guardians of the living and the dead.
Craving and Satiety.
Let us not draw conclusions rashly about the greatest things.
The hidden harmony is better than the visible.
Asses would choose stubble rather than gold.
Every animal is driven by blows.
There is only one supreme Wisdom. It wills and wills not to be called by the name of Zeus.
The name of the bow is life, but its work is death.
I have inquired of myself.
It is weariness upon the same things to labor and by them to be controlled.
If you do not hope, you will not win that which is not hoped for, since it is unattainable and inaccessible.
They understand neither how to hear nor how to speak.
