It is wise for those who hear, not me, but the universal Reason, to confess that all things are one.
To this universal Reason which I unfold, although it always exists, men make themselves insensible, both before they have heard it and when they have heard it for the first time. For notwithstanding that all things happen according to this Reason, men act as though they had never had any experience in regard to it when they attempt such words and works as I am now relating, describing each thing according to its nature and explaining how it is ordered. And some men are as ignorant of what they do when awake as they are forgetful of what they do when asleep.
Those who hear and do not understand are like the deaf. Of them the proverb says: "Present, they are absent."
Eyes and ears are bad witnesses to men having rude souls.
The majority of people have no understanding of the things with which they daily meet, nor, when instructed, do they have any right knowledge of them, although to themselves they seem to have.
They understand neither how to hear nor how to speak.
Much learning does not teach one to have understanding, else it would have taught Hesiod and Pythagoras, and again Xenophanes and Hecataeus.
Of all whose words I have heard, no one attains to this, to know that wisdom is apart from all.
There is one wisdom, to understand the intelligent will by which all things are governed through all.
The Law of Understanding is common to all. Those who speak with intelligence must hold fast to that which is common to all, even more strongly than a city holds fast to its law. For all human laws are dependent upon one divine Law, for this rules as far as it wills, and suffices for all, and overabounds.
Although the Law of Reason is common, the majority of people live as though they had an understanding of their own.
They are at variance with that with which they are in most continual association.
We ought not to act and speak as though we were asleep.
For human nature does not possess understanding, but the divine does.
The thoughtless man understands the voice of the Deity as little as the child understands the man.
It is better to conceal ignorance, but it is hard to do so in relaxation and over wine.
In Priene there lived Bias, son of Teutamus, whose word was worth more than that of others.
To me, one is ten thousand if he be the best.
Dogs, also, bark at what they do not know.
By its incredibility, it escapes their knowledge.
A stupid man loves to be puzzled by every discourse.
