Nature loves to conceal herself.
God is day and night, winter and summer, war and peace, plenty and want. But he is changed, just as when incense is mingled with incense, but named according to the pleasure of each.
Cold becomes warm, and warm, cold; wet becomes dry, and dry, wet.
...For there could be no harmony without sharps and flats, nor living beings without male and female which are contraries.
War is the father and king of all, and has produced some as gods and some as men, and has made some slaves and some free.
They do not understand: how that which separates unites with itself. It is a harmony of oppositions, as in the case of the bow and of the lyre.
The unlike is joined together, and from differences results the most beautiful harmony, and all things take place by strife.
The hidden harmony is better than the visible.
The straight and crooked way of the woolcarders is one and the same.
Asses would choose stubble rather than gold.
Sea water is very pure and very foul, for, while to fishes it is drinkable and healthful, to men it is hurtful and unfit to drink.
The harmony of the world is a harmony of oppositions, as in the case of the bow and of the lyre.
Good and evil are the same.
The physicians, therefore, says Heraclitus, cutting, cauterizing, and in every way torturing the sick, complain that the patients do not pay them fitting reward for thus effecting these benefits.
Unite whole and part, agreement and disagreement, accordant and discordant; from all comes one, and from one all.
They would not know the name of justice, were it not for these things.
For God in his dispensation of all events, perfects them into a harmony of the whole, just as, indeed, Heraclitus says that to God all things are beautiful and good and right, though men suppose that some are right and others wrong.
We must know that war is universal and strife right, and that by strife all things arise and are used.
The name of the bow is life, but its work is death.
Immortals are mortal, mortals immortal, living in their death and dying in their life.
The way upward and downward are one and the same.
For men to have whatever they wish, would not be well. Sickness makes health pleasant and good; hunger, satiety; weariness, rest.
And to these images they pray, as if one should prattle with the houses knowing nothing of gods or heroes, who they are.
