The English read with the highest satisfaction, and translated into
their tongue, the Elogium of Sir Isaac Newton, which M. de Fontenelle
spoke in the Academy of Sciences. M. de Fontenelle presides as judge
over philosophers; and the English expected his decision, as a solemn
declaration of the superiority of the English philosophy over that of
the French. But when it was found that this gentleman had compared
Descartes to Sir Isaac, the whole Royal Society in London rose up in
arms. So far from acquiescing with M. Fontenelle's judgment, they
criticised his discourse. And even several (who, however, were not the
ablest philosophers in that body) were offended at the comparison; and
for no other reason but because Descartes was a Frenchman.

It must be confessed that these two great men differed very much in
conduct, in fortune, and in philosophy.

Nature had indulged Descartes with a shining and strong imagination,
whence he became a very singular person both in private life and in his
manner of reasoning. This imagination could not conceal itself even in
his philosophical works, which are everywhere adorned with very
shining, ingenious metaphors and figures. Nature had almost made him a
poet; and indeed he wrote a piece of poetry for the entertainment of
Christina, Queen of Sweden, which however was suppressed in honour to
his memory.

He embraced a military life for some time, and afterwards becoming a
complete philosopher, he did not think the passion of love derogatory
to his character. He had by his mistress a daughter called Froncine,
who died young, and was very much regretted by him. Thus he
experienced every passion incident to mankind.

He was a long time of opinion that it would be necessary for him to fly
from the society of his fellow creatures, and especially from his
native country, in order to enjoy the happiness of cultivating his
philosophical studies in full liberty.

Descartes was very right, for his contemporaries were not knowing
enough to improve and enlighten his understanding, and were capable of
little else than of giving him uneasiness.

He left France purely to go in search of truth, which was then
persecuted by the wretched philosophy of the schools. However, he
found that reason was as much disguised and depraved in the
universities of Holland, into which he withdrew, as in his own
country. For at the time that the French condemned the only
propositions of his philosophy which were true, he was persecuted by
the pretended philosophers of Holland, who understood him no better;
and who, having a nearer view of his glory, hated his person the more,
so that he was obliged to leave Utrecht. Descartes was injuriously
accused of being an atheist, the last refuge of religious scandal: and
he who had employed all the sagacity and penetration of his genius, in
searching for new proofs of the existence of a God, was suspected to
believe there was no such Being.

Such a persecution from all sides, must necessarily suppose a most
exalted merit as well as a very distinguished reputation, and indeed he
possessed both. Reason at that time darted a ray upon the world
through the gloom of the schools, and the prejudices of popular
superstition. At last his name spread so universally, that the French
were desirous of bringing him back into his native country by rewards,
and accordingly offered him an annual pension of a thousand crowns.
Upon these hopes Descartes returned to France; paid the fees of his
patent, which was sold at that time, but no pension was settled upon
him. Thus disappointed, he returned to his solitude in North Holland,
where he again pursued the study of philosophy, whilst the great
Galileo, at fourscore years of age, was groaning in the prisons of the
Inquisition, only for having demonstrated the earth's motion.

At last Descartes was snatched from the world in the flower of his age
at Stockholm. His death was owing to a bad regimen, and he expired in
the midst of some literati who were his enemies, and under the hands of
a physician to whom he was odious.

The progress of Sir Isaac Newton's life was quite different. He lived
happy, and very much honoured in his native country, to the age of
fourscore and five years.

It was his peculiar felicity, not only to be born in a country of
liberty, but in an age when all scholastic impertinences were banished
from the world. Reason alone was cultivated, and mankind could only be
his pupil, not his enemy.

One very singular difference in the lives of these two great men is,
that Sir Isaac, during the long course of years he enjoyed, was never
sensible to any passion, was not subject to the common frailties of
mankind, nor ever had any commerce with women--a circumstance which was
assured me by the physician and surgeon who attended him in his last
moments.

We may admire Sir Isaac Newton on this occasion, but then we must not
censure Descartes.

The opinion that generally prevails in England with regard to these new
philosophers is, that the latter was a dreamer, and the former a sage.

Very few people in England read Descartes, whose works indeed are now
useless. On the other side, but a small number peruse those of Sir
Isaac, because to do this the student must be deeply skilled in the
mathematics, otherwise those works will be unintelligible to him. But
notwithstanding this, these great men are the subject of everyone's
discourse. Sir Isaac Newton is allowed every advantage, whilst
Descartes is not indulged a single one. According to some, it is to
the former that we owe the discovery of a vacuum, that the air is a
heavy body, and the invention of telescopes. In a word, Sir Isaac
Newton is here as the Hercules of fabulous story, to whom the ignorant
ascribed all the feats of ancient heroes.

In a critique that was made in London on Mr. de Fontenelle's discourse,
the writer presumed to assert that Descartes was not a great
geometrician. Those who make such a declaration may justly be
reproached with flying in their master's face. Descartes extended the
limits of geometry as far beyond the place where he found them, as Sir
Isaac did after him. The former first taught the method of expressing
curves by equations. This geometry which, thanks to him for it, is now
grown common, was so abstruse in his time, that not so much as one
professor would undertake to explain it; and Schotten in Holland, and
Format in France, were the only men who understood it.

He applied this geometrical and inventive genius to dioptrics, which,
when treated of by him, became a new art. And if he was mistaken in
some things, the reason of that is, a man who discovers a new tract of
land cannot at once know all the properties of the soil. Those who
come after him, and make these lands fruitful, are at least obliged to
him for the discovery. I will not deny but that there are innumerable
errors in the rest of Descartes' works.

Geometry was a guide he himself had in some measure fashioned, which
would have conducted him safely through the several paths of natural
philosophy. Nevertheless, it at last abandoned this guide, and gave
entirely into the humour of forming hypotheses; and then philosophy was
no more than an ingenious romance, fit only to amuse the ignorant. He
was mistaken in the nature of the soul, in the proofs of the existence
of a God, in matter, in the laws of motion, and in the nature of
light. He admitted innate ideas, he invented new elements, he created
a world; he made man according to his own fancy; and it is justly said,
that the man of Descartes is, in fact, that of Descartes only, very
different from the real one.

He pushed his metaphysical errors so far, as to declare that two and
two make four for no other reason but because God would have it so.
However, it will not be making him too great a compliment if we affirm
that he was valuable even in his mistakes. He deceived himself; but
then it was at least in a methodical way. He destroyed all the absurd
chimeras with which youth had been infatuated for two thousand years.
He taught his contemporaries how to reason, and enabled them to employ
his own weapons against himself. If Descartes did not pay in good
money, he however did great service in crying down that of a base
alloy.

I indeed believe that very few will presume to compare his philosophy
in any respect with that of Sir Isaac Newton. The former is an essay,
the latter a masterpiece. But then the man who first brought us to the
path of truth, was perhaps as great a genius as he who afterwards
conducted us through it.

Descartes gave sight to the blind. These saw the errors of antiquity
and of the sciences. The path he struck out is since become
boundless. Rohault's little work was, during some years, a complete
system of physics; but now all the Transactions of the several
academies in Europe put together do not form so much as the beginning
of a system. In fathoming this abyss no bottom has been found. We are
now to examine what discoveries Sir Isaac Newton has made in it.