NICK LAND
Circuitries

the doctor's face seems to swim in and out of focus
you see the pores in his skin
scrobicular arrays
and then -
suddenly
without dissolve
crossing the threshold
filmic cut
a circle of homogeneous flesh tone
nostrils sealed against the deluge
eyes shut and switched off forever
lips
teeth
tongue migrate downwards out of shot
the disk receding at speed towards a point of disappearance
in the centre of the screen
the old reality is closing down
passing through mathematical punctuality
the dot winks out in pixel death
we apologize for the loss of signal
there seems to be a transmission problem
we are unable to restore the home movie
you were three years old
wearing a cowboy hat
standing in the paddling pool
mummy and daddy smiling proudly
but your parents have been vaporized into a dot pattern
shapes and colours collapsed into digital codings
we have come to the end of the series
and there will be no repeats of daddy the doctor and mummy
the nurse
there has been a terrorist incident in the film archives

the Western civilization show has been discontinued
hundreds of gigabytes
God-daddy the unit
death-mummy the zero
stink of excrement and burnt celluloid
you must remember
one scrabbling at zero like a dog
it's the primal scene
you were warned not to play with the switches
now schizophrenia has adjusted your set
flies crawl out of the eye-sockets of black babies
breeding the dot patterns
-and for your special entertainment
we have turned you into a TV guided bomb
daddy is a North American aerospace corporation
mummy is an air-raid shelter
bit parts melt in the orgasm -
body fat burns
conception
you are minus nine months and counting
don't be scared
take twenty billion years and universal history is on the screen
big bang is to be redesigned
hydrogen fuses under the arc-lights
the camera angles can be improved
outside the studio schizophrenics drift in green and black
you feel that you've been here before
11.35 on a beautiful capitalist evening
runaway neon
traffic of sex and marihuana
your death window is rushing up
almost time for you to climb into the script
which when you're inside
is remembering where you came in
we're afraid it's impossible to take you live to the impact site
this report comes from beyond the electro-magnetic spectrum
if you climb out through the electrodes
the oxygen mask will descend automatically
please extinguish all smoking materials
deposit syringes in the tray provided
there will be a slight jolt as we cross over
thank you for flying with transnational commodification
we shall shortly be arriving in mayhem
if there is anybody on board who can impersonate a pilot
it would be of comfort to the other passengers

At a signal from the software virus linking us to the matrix we
cross over to the machinery, which is waiting to converge with
our nervous-systems. Our human camouflage is coming away,
skin ripping off easily, revealing the glistening electronics.
Information streams in from Cyberia; the base of true revolu¬
tion, hidden from terrestrial immuno-polrtics in the future. At
the stroke of the century's midnight we emerge from our lairs
to take all security apart, integrating tomorrow.

It is ceasing to be a matter of how we think about technics, if
only because technics is increasingly thinking about itself. It
might still be a few decades before artificial intelligences
surpass the horizon of biological ones, but it is utterly supersti¬
tious to imagine that the human dominion of terrestrial culture
is still marked out in centuries, let alone in some metaphysical
perpetuity. The high road to thinking no longer passes through
a deepening of human cognition, but rather through a be¬
coming inhuman of cognition, a migration of cognition out
into the emerging planetary technosentience reservoir, into
“dehumanized landscapes ... emptied spaces" (C2 5) where
human culture will be dissolved. Just as the capitalist urbaniza¬
tion of labour abstracted it in a parallel escalation with techni¬
cal machines, so will intelligence be transplanted into the
purring data zones of new software worlds in order to be
abstracted from an increasingly obsolescent anthropoid par¬
ticularity, and thus to venture beyond modernity. Human brains
are to thinking what mediaeval villages were to engineering;
antechambers to experimentation, cramped and parochial
places to be.

Since central nervous-system functions - especially those of the
cerebral cortex - are amongst the last to be technically sup¬
planted, it has remained superficially plausible to represent
technics as the region of anthropoid knowing corresponding
to the technical manipulation of nature, subsumed under the
total system of natural science, which is in turn subsumed
under the universal doctrines of epistemology, metaphysics,
and ontology. Two linear series are plotted; one tracking the
progress of technique in historical time, and the other tracking
the passage from abstract idea to concrete realization. These
two series chart the historical and transcendental dominion of
man.

Traditional schemas which oppose technics to nature, to liter¬
ate culture, or to social relations, are all dominated by a
phobic resistance to the side-lining of human intelligence by
the coming techno sapiens. Thus one sees the decaying
Hegelian socialist heritage clinging with increasing despera¬
tion to the theological sentimentalities of praxis, reification,
alienation, ethics, autonomy, and other such mythemes of
human creative sovereignty. A Cartesian howl is raised: peo¬
ple are being treated as things! Rather than as ... soul, spirit,
the subject of history, Dasein? For how long will this infantilism
be protracted?

If machinery is conceived transcendently as instrumental tech¬
nology it is essentially determined in opposition to social rela¬
tions, but if it is integrated immanently as cybernetic technics it
redesigns all oppositionality as non-linear flow. There is no
dialectic between social and technical relations, but only a
machinism that dissolves society into the machines whilst
deterritorializing the machines across the ruins of society, whose
“general theory ... is a generalized theory of flux" (CSI 312),
which is to say: cybernetics. Beyond the assumption that
guidance proceeds from the side of the subject lies desiring
production: the impersonal pilot of history. Distinctions be¬
tween theory and practice, culture and economy, science
and technics, are useless after this point. There is no real option
between a cybernetics of theory or a theory of cybernetics,
because cybernetics is neither a theory nor its object, but an
operation within anobjective partial circuits that reiterates
'itself' in the real and machines theory through the unknown,
“Production as a process overflows all ideal categories and
forms a cycle that relates itself to desire as an immanent
principle' (CSI 10)

Cybernetics develops functionally, and notrepresentationally:
a “desiring machine, a partial object, does not represent
anything' (CSI 55)

Its semi-closed assemblages are not descriptions but programs,
'auto'-replicated by way of an operation passing across irre¬
ducible exteriority. This is why cybernetics is inextricable from
exploration, having no integrity transcending that of an
uncomprehended circuit within which it is embedded, an
outside in which it must swim. Reflection is always very late,
derivative, and even then really something else.

A machinic assemblage is cybernetic to the extent that its
inputs program its outputs and its outputs program its inputs,
with incomplete closure, and without reciprocity. This necessi¬
tates that cybernetic systems emerge upon a fusional plane
that reconnects their outputs with their inputs in an “auto¬
production of the unconscious' (CSI 328). The inside pro¬
grams its reprogramming through the outside, according to
“cyclical movement by which the unconscious, always re¬
maining 'subject', reproduc(es) itself- (CSI 328), without hav¬
ing ever definitively antedated its reprogramming (“genera¬
tion ... is secondary in relation to the cycle" (CSI 328)). It is
thus that machinic processes are not merely functions, but also
sufficient conditions for the replenishing of functioning; imma¬
nent reprogrammings of the real, “not merely functioning, but
formation and autoproduction' (CSI 337).

Deleuze and Guattari are amongst the great cyberneticists,
but that they also surrender cybernetics to its modernist defini¬
tion is exhibited in a remark on capital in The Anti-Oedipus :
“an axiomatic of itself is by no means a simple technical
machine, not even an automatic or cybernetic machine"
(CSI 299). It is accepted that cybernetics is beyond mere
gadgetry (“not even"), it has something to do with automa¬
tion, and yet axiomatics exceeds it. This claim is almost
Hegelian in its preposterous humanism. Social axiomatics are
an automatizing machinism: a component of general cyber¬
netics, and ultimately a very trivial one. The capitalized termi¬
nus of anthropoid civilization ("axiomatics") will come to be
seen as the primitive trigger for a transglobal post-biological
machinism, from a future that shall have still scarcely begun to
explore the immensities of the cybercosm. Overman as cyborg,
or disorganization upon the matrix.

Reality is immanent to the machinic unconscious: it is impossi¬
ble to avoid cybernetics. We are already doing it, regardless
of-AAihai we think. Cybernetics is the aggravation of itself
happening, and whatever we do will be what made us have
to do it: we are doing things before they makesense. Not that
the cybernetics which have enveloped us are conceivable as
Wienerean gadgets: homeostats and amplifiers, directly or
indirectly cybernegative. Terrestrial reality is an explosive inte¬
gration, and in order to begin tracking such convergent or
cyberpositive process it is necessary to differentiate not just
between negative and positive feedback loops, but between
stabilization circuits, short-range runaway circuits, and long-
range runaway circuits. By conflating the two latter, modernist
cybernetics has trivialized escalation processes into
unsustainable episodes of quantitative inflation, thus side-lin¬
ing exploratory mutation over against a homeostatic para¬
digm. "Positive feedback is a source of instability, leading if
unchecked to'the destruction of the system itself" (CPM 50)
writes one neo-Wienerean, in strict fidelity to the security
cybernetico which continues to propagate an antidelirial
technoscience caged within negative feedback, and attuned
to the statist paranoia of a senescing industrialism.

Stabilization circuits suppress mutation, whilst short-range runa¬
way circuits propagate it only in an unsustainable burst, be¬
fore cancelling it entirely. Neither of these figures approximate
to self-designing processes or long-range runaway circuits,
such as Nietzsche's will to power, Freud's phylogenetic
thanatos, or Prigogine's dissipative structures. Long-range
runaway processes are self-designing, but only in such a way
that the self is perpetuated as something redesigned. If this is a
vicious circle it is because positive cybernetics must always be
described as such. Logic, after all, is from the start theology.


Long-range positive feedback is neither homeostatic, nor
amplificatory, but escalative. Where modernist cybernetic
models of negative and positive feedback are integrated,
escalation is integrating or cyber-emergent. It is the machinic
convergence of uncoordinated elements, a phase-change
from linear to non-linear dynamics. Design no longer leads
back towards a divine origin, because once shifted into cy¬
bernetics it ceases to commensurate with the theopolitical
ideal of the plan. Planning is the creationist symptom of
underdesigned software circuits, associated with domination,
tradition, and inhibition; with everything that shackles the
future to the past. All planning is theopolitics, and theopolitics
is cybernetics in a swamp.

Wiener is the great theoretician of stability cybernetics, inte¬
grating the sciences of communication and control in their
modern or managerial-technocratic form. But it is this new
science plus its unmanaged escalation through the real that is
for the first time cybernetics as the exponential source of its
own propaganda, programming us. Cyberpositive intensities
recirculate through our post-scientific techno-jargon as a fa¬
naticism for the future: as a danger that is not only real but
inexorable. We are programmed from where Cyberia has
already happened.

Wiener, of course, was still a moralist:

"Those of us who have contributed to the new science of
cybernetics stand in a moral position which is, to say the least,
not very comfortable. We have contributed to the initiation of
a new science which, as I have said, embraces technical
developments with great possibilities for good or evil."(Cyb
28).

Whilst scientists agonize, cybernauts drift. We no longer judge
such technical developments from without, we no longer
judge at all, we function: machined/machining in eccentric
orbits about the technocosm. Humanity recedes like a
loathesome dream.


Transcendental philosophy is the consummation of philoso¬
phy construed as the doctrine of judgement, a mode of
thinking that finds its zenith in Kant and its senile dementia in
Hegel. Its architecture is determined by two fundamental
principles: the linear application of judgement to its object,
form to intuition, genus to species, and the non-directional
reciprocity of relations, or logical symmetry. Judgement is the
great fiction of transcendental philosophy, but cybernetics is
the reality of critique.

Where judgement is linear and non-directional, cybernetics is
non-linear and directional. It replaces linear application with
the non-linear circuit, and non-directional logical relations
with directional material flows. The cybernetic dissolution of
judgement is an integrated shift from transcendence to imma¬
nence, from domination to control, and from meaning to
function. Cybernetic innovation replaces transcendental con¬
stitution, design loops replace faculties.

This is why the cybernetic sense of control is irreducible to the
traditional political conception of power based on a dyadic
master/slave relation, i.e. a transcendent, oppositional, and
signifying figure of domination. Domination is merely the
phenomenological portrait of circuit inefficiency, control mal¬
function, or stupidity. The masters do not need intelligence,
Nietzsche argues, therefore they do not have it. It is only the
confused humanist orientation of modernist cybernetics which
lines-up control with domination. Emergent control is not the
execution of a plan or policy, but the unmanageable explora¬
tion that escapes all authority and obsolesces law. According
to its futural definition control is guidance into the unknown,
exit from the box.

It is true that in the commodification process culture slides from
a judgemental to a machinic register, but this has nothing to
do with a supposedly 'instrumental rationality'. Instrumentality
is itself a judgemental construct that inhibits the emergence of
cybernetic functionalism. Instruments are gadgets, presup¬
posing a relation of transcendence, but where gadgets are
used, machines function. Far from instrument ally extending
authority, the efficiency of mastery is its undoing, since all
efficiency is cybernetics, and cybernetics dissolves domination
in mutant control.


Immuno-political individuality, or the pretention to transcend¬
ent domination of objects, does not begin with capitalism,
even though capital invests it with new powers and fragilities.
It emerges with the earliest social restriction of desiring produc¬
tion. "Man must constitute himself through the repression of
the intense germinal influx, the great bio cosmic memory that
threatens to deluge every attempt at collectivity' (CS1 225).
This repression is social history.

The socius separates the unconscious from what it can do,
crushing it against a reality that appears as transcendently
given, by trapping it within the operations of its own syntheses.
It is split-off from connective assemblage, which is represented
as a transcendent object, from disjunctive differentiation, which
is represented as a transcendent partition, and from conjunc¬
tive identification, which is represented as a transcendent
identity. This is an entire metaphysics of the unconscious and
desire, which is not (like the metaphysics of consciousness)
merely a philosophical vice, but rather the very architectural
principle of the social field, the infrastructure of what appears
as social necessity.

In its early stages psychoanalysis discovers that the uncon¬
scious is an impersonal machinism and that desire is positive
non-representational flow, yet it "remains in the precritical
age' (CS1 405), and stumbles before the task of an immanent
critique of desire, or decathexis of society. Instead it moves in
exactly the opposite direction; back into fantasy, representa¬
tion, and the pathos of inevitable frustration. Instead of re¬
building reality on the basis of the productive forces of the
unconscious, psychoanalysis ties up the unconscious ever more
tightly in conformity with the social model of reality. Embrac¬
ing renunciation with a bourgeoise earnestness, the psycho¬
analysts begin their robotized chant: "of course we have to
be repressed, we want to fuck our mothers and kill our fa¬
thers'. They settle down to the grave business of interpreta¬
tion, and all the stories lead back to Oedipus: "so you want to
fuck your mother and kill your father'.


On the plane of immanence or consistency with desire inter¬
pretation is completely irrelevant, or at least, it is always in trut
h
something else. Dreams, fantasies, myths, are merely the theat¬
rical representations of functional multiplicities, since “the
unconscious itself is no more structural than personal, it does
not symbolize any more than it imagines or represents; ft
engineers, it is machinic' (CS1 62). Desire does not represent
a lacked object, but assembles partial objects, it “is a ma¬
chine, and the object of desire is another machine connected
to it" (CS1 34). This is why, unlike psychoanalysis in its self¬
representation, “schizoanalysis is solely functional" (CS1 385).
It has no hermeneutical pretentions, but only a machinic
interface with “the molecular functions of the unconscious"
(CS1 387).

The unconscious is not an aspirational unity but an operative
swarm, a population of "preindividual and prepersonal
singularities, a pure dispersed and anarchic multiplicity, with¬
out unity or totality, and whose elements are welded, pasted
together by the real distinction or the very absence of a link'
(CS1 387). This absence of primordial or privileged relations is
the body without organs, the machinic plane of the molecular
unconscious. Social organization blocks-off the body without
organs, substituting a territorial, despotic, or capitalist socius
as an apparent principle of production, separating desire
from what it can do. Society is the organic unity that constricts
the libidinal diffusion of multiplicities across zero, the great
monolith of repression, which is why “(t)he body without
organs and the organs-partial objects are opposed conjointly
to the organism. The body without organs is in fact produced
as a whole, but a whole alongside the parts - a whole that
does not unify ortotalize, but that is added to them like a new,
really distinct part" (CS1 389).

Between the socius and the body without organs is the differ¬
ence between the political and the cybernetic, between the
familial and the anonymous, between neurosis and psychosis
or schizophrenia. Capitalism and schizophrenia name the
same desocialization process from the inside and the outside,
in terms of where it comes from (simulated accumulation) and
where it is going (impersonal delirium). Beyond sociality is a
universal schizophrenia whose evacuation from history ap¬
pears inside history as capitalism.


The word schizophrenia has both a neurotic and a schizo¬
phrenic usage. On the one hand condemnation, on the other
propagation. There are those who insist on asking stupid
questions such as: is this word being used properly? Don't you
feel guilty about playing about with so much suffering? You
must know that schizophrenics are very sad and wretched
people who we should pity? Shouldn't we leave that sort of
word with the psychocops who understand it? What's wrong
with sanity anyway? Where is your super ego?

Then there are those - momentarily less prevalent - who ask a
different sort of question: where does schizophrenia come
from? Why it it always subject to external description? Why is
psychiatry in love with neurosis? How do we swim out into the
schizophrenic flows? How do we spread them? How do we
dynamite the restrictive hydraulics of Oedipus?

Oedipus is the final bastion of immuno-politics, and schizo¬
phrenia is its outside. This is not to say that it is an exteriorit
y
determined by Oedipus, related in a privileged fashion to
Oedipus, anticipating Oedipus, or defying Oedipus. It is thor¬
oughly anoedipal, although it will casually consume the entire
Oedipal apparatus in the process through which terrestrial
history connects with an orphan cosmos. Schizophrenia is not,
therefore, a property of clinical schizophrenics, those medical
products devastated by an "artificial schizophrenia, such as
one sees in hospitals, the autistic wreck (s) produced as ...
entit(ies)" (CS1 11), On the contrary, “the schizo-entity" (CS1
162) is a defeated splinter of schizophrenia, pinned down by
the rubberized claws of sanity. The conditions of psychiatric
observation are carceral, so that it is a transcendental struc¬
ture of schizophrenia-as-object that it be represented in a state
of imprisonment.


Since the neuroticization of schizophrenia is the molecular
reproduction of capital, by means of a re-axiomatization
(reterritorialization) of decoding as accumulation, the histori¬
cal sense of psychoanalytic practice is evident. Schizophrenia
is the pattern to Freud's repressions, it is that which does not
qualify to pass the screen of Oedipal censorship. With those
who bow down to Oedipus we can do business, even make a
little money, but schizophrenics refuse transference, won't
play daddy and mummy, operate on a cosmic-religious plane,
the only thing we can do is lock them up (cut up their brains,
fry them with EOT, straightjacket them in Thorazine Behind
the social workers are the police, and behind the psychoana¬
lysts are the psychopolice. Deleuze/Guattari remark that "mad¬
ness is called madness and appears as such only because it ...
finds itself reduced to testifying all alone for deterritorialization
as a universal process' (CS1 383). The vanishing sandbank of
Oedipus wages its futile war against the tide. "There are still
not enough psychotics" (VII 146) writes Artaud the insurrec¬
tionist. Clinical schizophrenics are POWs from the future.

Since only Oedipus is repressible, the schizo is usually a lost
case to those relatively subtilized psychiatric processes that
co-operate with the endogeneous police functions of the
superego. This is why antischizophrenic psychiatry tends to be
an onslaught launched at gross or molar neuroanatomy and
neurochemistry oriented by theoretical genetics. Psychosurgery,
EOT, psychopharmacology ... it will be chromosomal recoding
soon. “It is thus that a tainted society has invented psychiatry
in order to defend itself from the investigations of certain
superior lucidities whose faculties of divination disturb it" (XIII
14). The medico-security apparatus know that schizos are not
going to climb back obediently into the Oedipal box. Psy¬
choanalysis washes its hands of them. Their nervous-systems
are the free-fire zones of an emergent neo-eugenicist cultural
security system.

Far from being a specifiable defect of human central nervous
system functioning, schizophrenia is the convergent motor of
cyberpositive escalation: an extraterritorial vastness to be dis¬
covered. Although such discovery occurs under conditions
that might be to a considerable extent specifiable, whatever
the progress in mapping the genetic, biochemical, aetiologi-
cal, socio-economic, etc. ‘bases' of schizophrenia, it remains
the case that conditions of reality are not reducible to condi¬
tions of encounter. This is “the dazzling dark truth that shelters
in delirium' (CS1 9). Schizophrenia would still be out there,
whether or not our species had been blessed with the oppor¬
tunity to travel to it.

" .. it is the end that is the commencement.

And that end

is the very one ( celle-meme )

that eliminates

all the means' (XII 84).

it is in the nature of specificities to be non-directional. The
biochemistry of sanity is no less arbitrary than that of escape
from it. From the perspective of a rigorous sanity the only
difference is that sanity is gregariously enforced, but from the
perspective of schizophrenia the issue ceases to be one of
specification, and mutates into something considerably more
profound. "What schizophrenia lives specifically, generically,
is not at all a specific pole of nature, but nature as a process o
f
production' (CS1 9).

Specifications are the disjunctive compartments of a differenti¬
ated unity from which schizophrenia entirely exits. Schizophre¬
nia creeps out of every box eventually, because "there is no
schizophrenic specificity or entity, schizophrenia is the universe
of productive and reproductive desiring machines, universal
primary production' (CS1 11). It is not merely that schizophre¬
nia is a pre-anthropoid. Schizophrenia is premammalian, pre-
zoological, pre-biological ... It is not for those trapped in a
constrictive sanity to terminate this regression. Who can be
surprized when schizophrenics delegate the question of mal¬
function? It is not a matter of what is wrong with them, but of
what is wrong with life, with nature, with matter, with the pre-
universal cosmos. Why are sentient life forms crammed into
boxes made out of lies? Why does the universe breed entire
populations of prison guards? Why does it feed its broken
explorers to packs of dogs? Why is the island of reality lost in
an ocean of madness? It is all very confusing.

As one medical authority on schizophrenia remarked:

“I think that one is justified in saying that in the realm of
intellectual operations there are certain dimensional media,
We may coil them fields or realms or frames of reference or
universes of discourse or strata. Some such field is necessarily
implied in any system or holistic organization. The schizo¬
phrenic thinking disturbance is characterized by a difficulty in
apprehending and constructing 'such organized fields" (LTS
120). (Dr Andras Angyal)

There can be little doubt that from the perspective of human
security Artaud falls prey to such a judgement. His prognosis
for man is to make

"... him pass one more and final time onto the autopsy table
to remake his anatomy.

I say, to remake his anatomy.

Man is sick because he is badly constructed.

One must resolve to render him naked and to scrape away
that animalcule which mortally irritates him,

"god,

and with god
his organs.

"Because bind me up if you want,

but there is nothing more inutile than an organ.

"Once you have made him a body without organs,
then you will have delivered him from all his automatisms
and consigned him to his true freedom" (XIII 104).


The body is processed by its organs, which it reprocesses. Its
"true freedom" is the exo-personal reprocessing of anorganic
abstraction: a schizoid corporealization outside organic clo¬
sure. If time was progressive schizophrenics would be escap¬
ing from human security, but in reality they are infiltrated from
the future. They come from the body without organs, the
deterritorium of Cyberia, a zone of subversion which is the
platform for a guerrilla war against the judgement of God. In
1947 Artaud reports upon the germination of the New World
Order or Human Security System on the basis of an American
globol hegemony, and describes the pattern of aggressive
warfaring it would require in “order to defend that senseless¬
ness of the factory against all the concurrences which cannot
fail to arise everywhere" (XIII 73).

The American age is yet to be decoded, and to suggest that
Artaud anticipates a range of conflicts whose zenith has been
the Vietnam war is not necessarily to participate in the ex¬
hausted anti-imperialist discourses which ultimately organize
themselves in terms of a Marxist-Leninist denunciation of mar¬
ket processes and their geo-political propagation. Artaud's
description of American techno-militarism has only the loosest
of associations with socialist polemics, despite its tight
intermeshing with the theme of production. The productivism
Artaud outlines is not interpreted through an assumed priority
of class interest, even when this is reduced to a dehumanized
axiomatic of profit maximization. Rather, "it is necessary by
means of all possible activity to replace nature wherever it can
be replaced" (XIII 72): a compulsion to industrial substitution,
funnelling production through the social organization of work.
The industrial apparatus of economic security proceeds by
way of the corporation: a despotic socio-corpuscle organiz¬
ing the labour process. Synergic experimentation is crushed
under a partially deterritorialized zone of command relations,
as if life was the consequence of its organization, but "it is not
due to organs that one lives, they are not life but its contrary"
(XXIII 65).

Nature is not the primitive or the simple, and certainly not the
rustic, the organic, or the innocent. It is the space of concur¬
rence, or unplanned synthesis, which is thus contrasted to the
industrial sphere of telic predestination: that of divine creation
or human work. Artaud's critique of America is no more
ecological than it is socialist: no more protective of an or¬
ganic nature than an organic sociality. It is not the alienation
of commodity production that is circled in Artaud's diagnosis
of the American age, but rather the eclipse of peyote and
“true morphine" by “smoking ersatzes" (XIII 73, 74). This
development is derided precisely because the latter are more
organic, participating mechanically in an industrial macro¬
organism, and thus squaring delirium with the judgement of
God. Peyote and the human nervous system assemble a
symbiosis or parallel machinism, like the wasp and the orchid,
and all the other cybermachineries of the planet. Capital is
not overdeveloped nature, but underdeveloped schizophre¬
nia, which is why nature is contrasted to industrial organiza¬
tion, and not to the escalation of cybertechnics, or anorganic
convergence: "reality ... is not yet constructed" (XIII 110).
Schizophrenia is nature as cyberpositive mutation, at war with
the security complex of organic judgement.

“The body is the body,
it is alone

and has no need of organs,
the body is never an organism,
organisms are the enemies of the body,
the things that one does

happen quite alone without the assistance of any or¬
gan,

every organ is a parasite,
it recovers a parastic function
destined to make a being live
which does not have to be there.

Organs have only been made in order to give beings some¬
thing

to eat...." (XIII 287).

Organs crawl like aphids upon the immobile motor of becom¬
ing, sucking at intensive fluids that convert them cybernetically
into components of an unconceivable machinism. The sap is
becoming stranger, and even rf the fat bugs of psychiatrically
policed property relations think they make everything happen
they are following a program which only schizophrenia can
decode.

Anorganic becomings happen retroefficientiy, anastrophically.
They are tropisms attesting to an infection by the future. Con¬
vergent waves zero upon the body, subverting the totality of
the organism by way of an inverted but ateleological causal¬
ity, enveloping and redirecting progressive development. As
capital collides schizophrenically with the matrix ascendent
sedimentations of organic inheritance and exchange are
melted by the descendent intensities of virtual corporealization.

“Which comes first, the chicken or the egg ..." (CS1 325)?
Machinic processing or its reprocessing by the body without
organs? The body without organs is the cosmic egg: virtual
matterthat reprograms time and reprocesses progressive influ¬
ence. What time will always have been is not yet designed,
and the future leaks into schizophrenia. The schizo only has an
aetiology as a sub-program of descendant reprocessing.

How could medicine be expected to cope with disorderings
that come from the future?

“It is thus that:

the great secret of Indian culture
is to restore the world to zero,

always,

“but sooner (plutot)

1: too late than sooner (plus tot),

“2: which is to say
sooner

than too soon,

“3: which is to say that the later is unable
to return unless sooner has eaten
too soon,

“4: which is to say that in time
