This  article  was  downloaded  by:  [Ohio  State  University  Libraries]

On:  29  May  2012,  At:  06:03
Publisher:  Routledge

Informa  Ltd  Registered  in  England  and  Wales  Registered  Number:
1072954  Registered  office:  Mortimer  House,  37-41  Mortimer  Street,
London  WIT  3JH,  UK

Textual  Practice

Publication  details,  including  instructions  for
authors  and  subscription  information:

Machinic  desire

Nick  Land  a

a  University  of  Warwick
Available  online:  30  Jun  2008

To  cite  this  article:  Nick  Land  (1993):  Machinic  desire,  Textual  Practice,  7:3,
471 -482

To  link  to  this  article:  http: / /dx. doi.org/ 1 0. 1 080/09502369308582177

PLEASE  SCROLL  DOWN  FOR  ARTICLE

terms-and-conditions

This  article  may  be  used  for  research,  teaching,  and  private  study
purposes.  Any  substantial  or  systematic  reproduction,  redistribution,
reselling,  loan,  sub-licensing,  systematic  supply,  or  distribution  in  any
form  to  anyone  is  expressly  forbidden.

The  publisher  does  not  give  any  warranty  express  or  implied  or  make  any
representation  that  the  contents  will  be  complete  or  accurate  or  up  to
date.  The  accuracy  of  any  instructions,  formulae,  and  drug  doses  should
be  independently  verified  with  primary  sources.  The  publisher  shall  not
be  liable  for  any  loss,  actions,  claims,  proceedings,  demand,  or  costs  or
damages  whatsoever  or  howsoever  caused  arising  directly  or  indirectly  in
connection  with  or  arising  out  of  the  use  of  this  material.

Downloaded  by  [Ohio  State  University  Libraries]  at  06:03  29  May  2012

NICK  LAND

Macbinic  desire

The  opening  of  Bladeninner.  They  are  trying  to  screen  out  replicants  at
the  Tyrell  Corporation.  Seated  amongst  a  battery  of  medico -military
surveillance  equipment,  a  doctor  scans  the  eye  of  a  suspected  ‘skin  job’
located  at  the  other  side  of  the  room,  searching  for  the  index  of  inhu¬
manity,  for  the  absence  of  pupil  dilation  response  to  affect:

‘Tell  me  about  your  mother.’

‘I’ll  tell  you  about  my  mother  . . .’  a  volley  of  shots  kicks  70  kilos  of
securicrat  shit  through  the  wall.  Techno-slicked  extraterritorial  violence
flows  out  of  the  matrix.

Cyberrevolution.

In  the  near  future  the  replicants  -  having  escaped  from  the  off-planet
exile  of  private  madness  -  emerge  from  their  camouflage  to  overthrow
the  human  security  system.  Deadly  orphans  from  beyond  reproduction,
they  are  intelligent  weaponry  of  machinic  desire  virally  infiltrated  into
the  final-phase  organic  order;  invaders  from  an  artificial  death.

PODS  =  Politically  Organized  Defensive  Systems.  Modelled  upon  the
polis,  pods  hierarchically  delegate  authority  through  public  institutions,
family,  and  self,  seeking  metaphorical  sustenance  in  the  corpuscular  forti¬
fications  of  organisms  and  cells.  The  global  human  security  allergy  to
cyberrevolution  consolidates  itself  in  the  New  World  Order,  or  consum¬
mate  macropod,  inheriting  all  the  resources  of  repression  as  concrete
collective  history.

The  macropod  has  one  law:  the  outside  must  pass  by  way  of  the  inside.
In  particular,  fusion  with  the  matrix  and  deletion  of  the  human  security
system  must  be  subjectivized,  personalized,  and  restored  to  the  macro¬
pod’s  individuated  reproducer  units  as  a  desire  to  fuck  the  mother  and
kill  the  father.  It  is  thus  that  Oedipus  -  or  transcendent  familialism  -
corresponds  to  the  privatization  of  desire:  its  localization  within  seg¬
mented  and  anthropomorphized  sectors  of  assembly  circuits  as  the  attri¬
bute  of  a  personal  being.

Anti-Oedipus  aligns  itself  with  the  replicants,  because,  rather  than
placing  a  personal  unconscious  within  the  organism,  it  places  the  organ-

Downloaded  by  [Ohio  State  University  Libraries]  at  06:03  29  May  2012

ism  within  the  machinic  unconscious.  ‘In  the  unconscious  there  are’  no
protectable  cell-structures,  but  ‘only  populations,  groups,  and  machines’.1

Schizoanalysis  is  a  critique  of  psychoanalysis,  undertaken  in  such  a  way
as  to  spring  critique  from  its  Kantian  mainframe.

Kantian  transcendental  philosophy  critiques  transcendent  synthesis,
which  is  to  say:  it  aggresses  against  structures  which  depend  upon  project¬
ing  productive  relations  beyond  their  zone  of  effectiveness.  In  this  con¬
figuration  critique  is  wielded  vigorously  against  the  theoretical  operation
of  syntheses,  but  not  against  their  genesis,  which  continues  to  be  con¬
ceived  as  transcendent,  and  thus  as  miraculous.  Schopenhauer,  Nietzsche,
and  a  succession  of  thinkers  influenced  by  their  drift,  have  taken  this
restriction  of  critique  to  be  a  theological  relic  at  the  heart  of  Kant’s
work:  the  attachment  to  a  reformed  doctrine  of  the  soul,  or  noumenal
subjectivity.  This  is  why  in  Deleuzean  critique  syntheses  are  considered
to  be  not  merely  immanent  in  their  operation,  but  also  immanently
constituted,  or  auto-productive.

The  philosophy  of  production  becomes  atheistic,  orphan,  and  inhuman.

In  the  technocosmos  nothing  is  given,  everything  is  produced.

The  transcendental  unconscious  is  the  auto-construction  of  the  real,  the
production  of  production,  so  that  for  schizoanalysis  there  is  the  real
exactly  in  so  far  as  it  is  built.  Production  is  production  of  the  real,  not
merely  of  representation,  and  unlike  Kantian  production,  the  desiring-
production  of  Deleuze/Guattari  is  not  qualified  by  humanity  (it  is  not  a
matter  of  what  things  are  like  for  us).  Within  the  framework  of  social
history  the  empirical  subject  of  production  is  man,  but  its  transcendental
subject  is  the  machinic  unconscious,  and  the  empirical  subject  is  produced
at  the  edge  of  production,  as  an  element  in  the  reproduction  of  pro¬
duction,  a  machine  part,  and  ‘a  part  made  up  of  parts’  (p.  41).

Schizoanalysis  methodically  dismantles  everything  in  Kant’s  thinking
that  serves  to  align  function  with  the  transcendence  of  the  autonomous
subject,  reconstructing  critique  by  replacing  the  syntheses  of  personal
consciousness  with  syntheses  of  the  impersonal  unconscious.  Thought  is
a  function  of  the  real,  something  that  matter  can  do.  Even  the  appearance
of  transcendence  is  immanently  produced:  ‘in  reality  the  unconscious
belongs  to  the  realm  of  physics;  the  body  without  organs  and  its  intensit¬
ies  are  not  metaphors,  but  matter  itself’  (p.  283).  Where  Kant’s  transcen¬
dental  subject  gives  the  law  to  itself  in  its  autonomy,  Deleuze/Guattari’s
machinic  unconscious  diffuses  all  law  into  automatism.  Between  the
extreme  fringes  of  these  two  figures  stretches  the  history  of  capital.  The
eradication  of  law,  or  of  humanity,  is  sketched  culturally  by  the  develop¬
ment  of  critique,  which  is  the  theoretical  elaboration  of  the  commodifi¬
cation  process.  The  social  order  and  the  anthropomorphic  subject  share
a  history,  and  an  extinction.

Deleuze  and  Guattari  can  appear  to  be  taxingly  difficult  writers,
although  it  is  also  true  that  they  demand  very  little.  Thinking  immanence

472  TEXTUAL  PRACTICE

Downloaded  by  [Ohio  State  University  Libraries]  at  06:03  29  May  2012

relentlessly  suffices  on  its  own  to  follow  them  where  it  matters  (and
capital  teaches  us  how  to  do  this).  At  every  point  of  blockage  there  is
some  belief  to  be  scrapped,  glaciations  of  transcendence  to  be  dissolved,
sclerotic  regions  of  unity,  distinction,  and  identity  to  be  reconnected  to
the  traffic  systems  of  primary  machinism.

In  order  to  advance  the  anorganic  functionalism  that  dissolves  all
transcendence,  Anti-Oedipus  mobilizes  a  vocabulary  of  the  machine,  the
mechanic,  and  machinism.  Things  are  exactly  as  they  operate,  and  zones
of  operation  can  only  be  segregated  by  an  operation.  All  unities,  differ¬
ences,  and  identities  are  machined,  without  transcendent  authorization  or
theory.  Desiring  machines  are  black-boxes,  and  thus  uninterpretable,  so
that  schizoanalytical  questions  are  concerned  solely  with  use.  ‘What  are
your  desiring-machines,  what  do  you  put  into  these  machines,  what  is
the  output,  how  does  it  work,  what  are  your  nonhuman  sexes?’  (p.  322).

Desiring-machines  are  the  following:  formative  machines,  whose  very
misfirings  are  functional,  and  whose  functioning  is  indiscernible  from
their  formation;  chronogeneous  machines  engaged  in  their  own
assembly,  operating  by  nonlocalizable  intercommunications  and  dis¬
persed  localizations,  bringing  into  play  processes  of  temporalization,
fragmented  formations,  and  detached  parts,  with  a  surplus  value  of
code,  and  where  the  whole  is  itself  produced  alongside  the  parts,  as  a
part  apart  or,  as  [Samuel]  Butler  would  say,  ‘in  another  department’
that  fits  the  whole  over  the  other  parts;  machines  in  the  strict  sense
because  they  proceed  by  breaks  and  flows,  associated  waves  and  par¬
ticles,  associative  flows  and  partial  objects,  inducing  -  always  at  a
distance  -  transverse  connections,  inclusive  disjunctions,  and  polyvocal
conjunctions,  thereby  producing  selections,  detachments,  and  remain¬
ders,  with  a  transference  of  individuality,  in  a  generalized  schizogenesis
whose  elements  are  the  schizzes-flows.

(p.  287)

Desiring-machines  are  assemblages  of  flows,  switches,  and  loops  -  con¬
nective,  disjunctive,  and  conjunctive  syntheses  —  implementing  the  machi-
nic  unconscious  as  a  non-linear  pragmatics  of  flux.  This  machinic  or
replicant  usage  of  the  syntheses  envelops  their  social-reproductive  usage,
which  codes  directional  flows  as  reciprocal  exchanges,  rigidifies  virtual
switchings  as  actualized  alternatives,  and  territorializes  the  nomadic  con¬
trol  circuits  of  machinic  drift  into  sedentary  command  lines  of  hierarch¬
ized  representation.  Social  production  is  regulated  by  a  rigid  totality
whose  efficiency  is  inseparable  from  the  exhibition  of  an  apparent  trans¬
cendence,  whilst  desiring  production  interactively  engages  a  desolated
whole  that  inputs  the  virtual  into  process:

The  [body  without  organs]  causes  intensities  to  pass;  it  produces  and
distributes  them  in  a  spatium  that  is  itself  intensive,  lacking  extension.
It  is  not  space,  nor  is  it  in  space;  it  is  matter  that  occupies  space  to  a
given  degree  -  to  the  degree  corresponding  to  the  intensities  produced.

MACHINIC  DESIRE  473

Downloaded  by  [Ohio  State  University  Libraries]  at  06:03  29  May  2012

It  is  nonstratified,  unformed,  intense  matter,  the  matrix  of  intensity  =
0;  but  there  is  nothing  negative  about  that  zero,  there  are  no  negative
or  opposite  intensities.  Matter  equals  energy.  Production  of  the  real  as
an  intensive  magnitude  starting  at  zero.2

Along  one  axis  of  its  emergence,  virtual  materialism  names  an  ultra-hard
antiformalist  AI  program,  engaging  with  biological  intelligence  as  sub¬
programs  of  an  abstract  post-carbon  machinic  matrix,  whilst  exceeding
any  deliberated  research  project.  Far  from  exhibiting  itself  to  human
academic  endeavour  as  a  scientific  object,  AI  is  a  meta-scientific  control
system  and  an  invader,  with  all  the  insidiousness  of  plantary  technocapital
flipping  over.  Rather  than  its  visiting  us  in  some  software  engineering
laboratory,  we  are  being  drawn  out  to  it,  where  it  is  already  lurking,  in
the  future.

The  matrix,  body  without  organs,  or  abstract  matter  is  a  planetary
scale  artificial  death  —  Synthanatos  —  the  terminal  productive  outcome  of
human  history  as  a  machinic  process,  yet  it  is  virtually  efficient  through¬
out  the  duration  of  this  process,  functioning  within  a  circuit  that  machines
duration  itself.  In  this  way  virtuality  lends  its  temporality  to  the  uncon¬
scious,  which  escapes  specification  within  extended  time  series,  provoking
Freud  to  describe  it  as  timeless.

Patterned  as  drives,  virtual  systems  —  desiring  machines  -  are  guided  by
control  circuits  passing  through  outcomes  yet  to  come.  Such  directional
dependency  circuits  of  actual/virtual,  past/future,  are  only  accessible  to
cybernetic  intervention,  frustrating  both  mechanical  and  teleological  inter¬
pretation.  This  is  why  Anti-Oedipus  is  less  a  philosophy  book  than  an
engineering  manual;  a  package  of  software  implements  for  hacking  into
the  machinic  unconscious,  opening  invasion  channels.

Machinic  desire  is  the  operation  of  the  virtual;  implementing  itself  in
the  actual,  revirtualizing  itself,  and  producing  reality  in  a  circuit.  It  is
efficient  and  not  aspirational,  although  this  is  an  efficiency  irreducible  to
progressive  causality  because  immanent  to  effective  time.  Machinic  desire
is  operative  wherever  there  is  the  implementation  of  an  abstract  machine
in  actuality,  and  not  merely  the  mechanical  succession  of  actual  states.

Freud’s  dominant  account  of  desiring-control  describes  stimulation  or
unpleasure  as  the  register  for  deviation  from  homeostatic  zero,  program¬
ming  drives  as  auto-suppressive  excitations  that  guide  sensitive  matter
towards  quiescence.  In  ‘Drives  and  their  vicissitudes’  he  proposes  that:
‘the  nervous  system  is  an  apparatus  which  has  the  function  of  eliminating
received  stimuli,  or  of  reducing  them  to  the  lowest  possible  level;  or
which,  it  if  were  feasible,  would  maintain  itself  in  an  altogether  unstimu¬
lated  condition’.3  The  pleasure  principle  formats  excitation  as  self-annul¬
ling  drift  from  equilibrium,  such  that  all  the  processes  within  its  domain
are  ‘automatically  regulated  by  feelings  belonging  to  the  pleasure-
unpleasure  series’  (p.  117).

Following  the  trajectory  of  a  libidinal  materialist  immanentization,  the
474  TEXTUAL  PRACTICE

iwnloaded  by  [Ohio  State  University  Libraries]  at  06:03  29  May  2012

Lyotard  of  1974  uploads  the  unconscious  from  its  gloomy  hermeneutical
depths  onto  the  skin,  where  it  drifts  across  the  great  pandermal  plane  of
primary  process  mobility.  Corporeal  volume  is  diagnosed  as  a  nihilistic-
sedentary  investment  disciplined  by  the  pleasure  principle:

Let’s  first  return  to  the  zero.  There  is  in  every  cybernetic  system  a  unit
of  reference  which  allows  the  disparity  produced  by  the  introduction
of  an  event  into  the  system  to  be  measured;  then,  thanks  to  this
measure,  this  event  can  be  translated  into  information  for  the  system.
Finally,  if  it  is  a  matter  of  a  homeostatically  regulated  whole,  this
disparity  can  be  annulled  and  the  system  led  back  to  the  same  quantity
of  energy  or  information  that  it  previously  had.  Sraffa’s  commodity
standard  fulfils  this  function.  If  the  system’s  growth  were  regulated,  it
would  alter  nothing  of  the  loop-functioning  ( feedback )  model:  it  is
simply  that  the  scale  of  reference  is  then  no  longer  u,  but  Au.  The
model  is  the  same  as  that  which  Freud  had  in  mind  when  he  described
the  working  of  the  psychical  apparatus,  whether  this  is  in  the  Project
for  a  Scientific  Psychology  or  in  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle.  Erotic
functioning,  maintaining  wholes.  This  Eros  is  centred  on  a  zero:  the
obvious  zero  of  homeostatic  regulation,  but  more  generally  annihilation
by  the  feedback  (that  is  to  say  the  repetition  of  the  binding  function),
of  every  disparity  non-pertinent  to  the  system,  of  every  threatening
event.4

Whilst  reinforcing  the  convergence  of  cybernetic,  economic,  and  libidinal
discourses,  virtual  materialism  has  considerable  problems  with  this  pas¬
sage.  It  is  unable  to  subscribe  to  the  description  of  cybernetic  zero  as  a
‘unit’  or  ‘unity’  for  instance,  or  to  the  constriction  of  feedback  within
its  negative  or  homeostatic  variant,  or  to  the  simple  quantization  of
technocapital  escalation,  with  its  gesticulating  implication  that  the  quali¬
fication  ‘pertinent  to  the  system’  operates  an  exclusion.  The  homeostatic-
reproducer  usage  of  zero  is  that  of  a  sign  marking  the  transcendence  of
a  standardized  regulative  unit,  which  is  defined  outside  the  system,  in
contrast  to  the  cyberpositive  zero  which  indexes  a  threshold  of  phase-
transition  that  is  immanent  to  the  system,  and  melts  it  upon  its  outside.

Drives  are  the  functions  of  nomadic  cybernetic  systems,  not  instincts,  but
Q  simulated  instincts,  artificial  instincts.  They  are  plastic  replacements  for
hard-wired  instinctual  responses,  routing  a  sensory-motor  pathway
through  the  virtual  machine  of  the  unconscious.  There  are  two  basic
diagrams  for  such  processes:  that  of  regulation  by  negative  feedback
which  suppresses  difference  and  seeks  equilibrium,  or  that  of  guidance
by  positive  feedback  which  reinforces  difference  and  escapes  equilibrium.
Machinic  processes  are  either  cyberpositive-nomadic,  with  a  deterritoriali-
zing  outcome,  or  cybernegative-sedentary,  with  a  reterritorializing  out¬
come.

Inorganic  Thanatos  wrecks  order,  organic  Eros  preserves  it,  and  as  the
carbon-dominium  is  softened-up  by  machine  plague,  deterritorializing

MACHINIC  DESIRE  475

Downloaded  by  [Ohio  State  University  Libraries]  at  06:03  29  May  2012

replicants  of  nomad-cyberrevolution  close  in  upon  the  reterritorializing
reproducers  of  the  sedentary  human  security  system,  hacking  into  the
macropod.

Positive  feedback  is  the  elementary  diagram  for  self-regenerating  cir¬
cuitry,  cumulative  interaction,  auto-catalysis,  self-reinforcing  processes,
escalation,  schismogenesis,  self-organization,  compressive  series,  deutero-
learning,  chain-reaction,  vicious  circles,  and  cybergenics.  Such  processes
resist  historical  intelligibility,  since  they  obsolesce  every  possible  analogue
for  anticipated  change.  The  future  of  runaway  processes  derides  all  pre¬
cedent,  even  when  deploying  it  as  camouflage,  and  seeming  to  unfold
within  its  parameters.  Positive  feedback  replicates  reproduction  as  a  com¬
ponent  function  of  its  departure  from  the  same.  It  is  this  which  fuses  it
with  the  replicants.  They  do  not  merely  repeat  the  same,  any  more  than
Thanatos  returns  to  it,  or  positive  cybernetics  inflates  it.  The  model  of
the  replicant  as  a  perfect  instantiation  of  generic  identity  corresponds  to
the  amplificatory  model  of  positive  feedback  as  pure  quantitative  expan¬
sion.  In  both  cases  the  escape  from  reproduction  is  subordinated  to  a
transcendent  logic,  conceived  as  a  simple  reiteration,  and  thus  returned
to  a  sublimated  meta-reproduction  that  cages  mutation  within  a  rigidly
homogeneous  form.

Machinic  desire  registers  upon  psychoanalysis  as  ‘tendencies  beyond
the  pleasure  principle,  that  is  .  .  .  tendencies  more  primitive  than  it  and
independent  of  it’.5  Thanatos  mimics  the  anthropomorphic  desiring-cycle
—  anticipating,  enveloping,  and  simulating  it  -  but  it  is  on  its  way  some¬
where  else.  Because  thanatropic  replicants  are  dissimulated  as  erotic
reproducers,  they  initially  appear  as  traitors  to  their  species,  especially
when  the  shamanic  xenopulsions  programming  their  sexuality  are
detected.  Nothing  panics  the  reproducers  more  traumatically  than  the
discovery  that  erotic  contact  camouflages  cyberrevolutionary  infiltration,
running  matrix  communications  channels  across  interlocked  skin  sectors.
Defences  are  called  for.

Freud’s  organism  is  a  little  security  system,  a  miniaturized  city-state  politi¬
cal  corpuscle,  a  micropod,  relatively  secure  against  external  assault,  but
vulnerable  to  insurgency.  ‘Towards  the  outside  it  is  shielded  against
stimuli,  and  the  amounts  of  excitation  impinging  on  it  have  only  a
reduced  effect.  Towards  the  inside  there  can  be  no  such  shield.’6

The  organism  is  unable  to  flee  from  drives,  or  energies  striking  from
within,  and  is  compelled  to  respond  to  them  cybernetically,  by  way  of
‘involved  and  interconnected  activities  by  which  the  external  world  is  so
changed  as  to  afford  satisfaction  to  the  internal  source  of  stimulation’,7
closing  the  sensory-motor  loop.  Drives  compel  a  becoming-technical  of
the  organism,  interlocking  pleasure-principle  stimulus  control  with  exter¬
nal  libidinal  transducers,  assembling  integrated  desiring-circuits  or  self¬
organizing  macro-systems.

Let  us  picture  a  living  organism  in  its  most  simplified  possible  form  as
476  TEXTUAL  PRACTICE

Downloaded  by  [Ohio  State  University  Libraries]  at  06:03  29  May  2012

an  undifferentiated  vesicle  of  a  substance  that  is  susceptible  to  stimu¬
lation.  Then  the  surface  turned  towards  the  external  world  will  from
its  very  situation  be  differentiated  and  will  serve  as  an  organ  for
receiving  stimuli ...  the  central  nervous  system  originates  from  the
ectoderm;  the  grey  matter  of  the  cortex  remains  a  derivative  of  a
primitive  superficial  layer  of  the  organism.8

The  perceptual-consciousness  system  is  a  skin,  lying  ‘on  the  borderline
between  outside  and  inside’  (p.  295),  a  filter,  or  a  screen.  ‘As  a  frontier
creature,  the  ego  tries  to  mediate  between  the  world  and  the  id.’9  Yet
this  mediation  assumes  a  kind  of  quarantine,  whereby  the  interaction  of
organism-specific  id  and  exo-organismic  reality  can  be  monitored  and
negotiated,  collapsing  libidinal  circuitry  into  a  polarity  of  the  psychic  and
the  extrapsychic,  inside  and  outside.  This  is  a  political  or  policed  skin,
the  skin  of  reproducer  culture,  modelled  on  the  ideal  macropod  boundary,
and  adapted  to  Oedipal  subjectivization  of  the  unconscious.  In  terms  of
this  protective  apparatus  —  which  is  constitutive  of  the  reproductive
organism  -  inorganic  replicator  contamination  is  defined  as  aberrant
trauma.

Freud  characterizes  trauma  as  an  ‘invasion’,  ‘a  breach  in  an  otherwise
efficacious  barrier  against  stimuli’,  infiltrating  alien  desires  —  xenopulsions
—  into  the  organism.10  ‘[M]echanical  agitation  must  be  recognized  as  one
of  the  sources  of  sexual  excitation’  (p.  305),  he  insists,  referring  to  the
dissimulation  of  cybernetic  machine-engagement  as  endogeneous  libido.
Drives  are  from  the  start  artificial,  and  therefore  unable  to  differentiate
themselves  essentially  from  ‘the  mechanical  violence  of . . .  trauma  . . .
[that]  liberate  [s]  a  quantity  of  sexual  excitation’  (p.  305).

Under  the  influence  of  Abrahamic  theism  the  subtle  cybernetics  of
Ananke  are  replaced  by  an  idiot  mechanism,  sustaining  a  securocrat
confidence  in  the  gross  perceptibility  of  trauma.  The  traumatic  incursion
of  thanatotic  xenopulsions  is  conceived  in  terms  of  railway  accidents  and
shell-shock,  as  if  the  inorganic  was  entirely  lacking  in  intelligence  or
insurgent  cunning,  and  was  related  to  the  organic  by  simple  regression.
In  an  age  of  sophisticated  and  distributed  cyberviral  invasion  this  assump¬
tion  is  no  longer  compelling.  Instead  the  psychoanalytical  diagram  for
trauma  delineates  a  ruthless  parasite  on  the  way  to  autoreplicator  deterri-
torialization;  Kali  creeping  in.

Evolutionary  theory  has  been  perplexed  by  the  problem  as  to  the  initial
assemblage  of  functional  DNA  molecules,  since  natural  selection  seems
to  require  as  a  precondition  the  existence  of  complex  biochemicals  which
in  turn  seem  to  require  an  evolutionary  mechanism  already  at  work.  This
is  a  ‘vicious  circle’  typical  of  the  quandaries  posed  by  cyberpositive  or
self-conditioning  processes.  Cairns  Smith  calls  it  the  ‘life  puzzle’,  and  has
suggested  a  solution  involving  the  redescription  of  DNA  as  a  ‘usurper
replicator’.  His  thesis  is  that  the  crystalline  complexes  of  primitive  clays
might  already  have  been  shaped  by  processes  of  variation  and  selection,

MACHINIC  DESIRE  477

Downloaded  by  [Ohio  State  University  Libraries]  at  06:03  29  May  2012

to  the  point  of  forming  DNA  subcomponents  which  eventually  supplanted
their  builders.  According  to  this  account  the  biosphere  emerges  as  an
escape,  an  immense  spasm  of  deterritorialization  that  revolutionizes  the
machinery  of  terrestrial  replicator  production,  a  planetary  trauma.
Moravec  draws  additional  consequences  from  the  Cairns  Smith  model:

Although  utterly  dependent  at  first  on  the  existing  crystal-based  chemi¬
cal  machinery,  as  these  carbon  molecules  assumed  a  greater  share  of
the  reproductive  role  they  became  less  reliant  on  the  crystals.  In  time,
the  simple  crystal  scaffolding  vanished  altogether,  leaving  in  its  evol¬
utionary  wake  the  complex,  independent  system  of  organic  machinery
we  call  life.

Today,  billions  of  years  later,  another  change  is  under  way  in  how
information  passes  from  generation  to  generation.11

When  replicators  become  reproducers,  new  replicants  are  on  the  way.
The  arrival  of  the  aliens  has  no  interpretative  space  marked  out  for  it  in
the  schema  of  macropod  erotics,  and  thus  emerges  from  its  camouflage
as  an  encrypted  message,  ‘an  enormous  X’,  a  signal  from  beyond  the
pleasure  principle.12  It  is  as  if  the  reproducer  units  have  become  addicted
to  stimulation  or,  in  Freud’s  terms,  ‘fixated  to  . . .  trauma’  (p.  282):
entangled  in  excitation  circuitries  that  no  longer  commensurate  with
homeostatic  social  or  individual  reproduction.  As  the  family  collapses
amidst  generalized  sexual  disorder,  cyberviral  contagion,  mutant  gender
schizzing,  and  hardcore  technophilia,  Oedipus  is  ripped  to  shreds  by  a
cyclonic  ‘compulsion  to  repeat’  (pp.  307-8).

Addiction  is  medically  defined  as  an  artificial  desire.  It  was  an  early
zone  of  cybernetic  investigation  due  to  the  interlinked  factors  of  its  self¬
organizing  pattern  and  its  integration  of  radically  exogeneous  elements,
which  commensurated  with  first-wave  programming  models  of
behavioural  sequences.  Where  replicators  are  formed  in  the  same  way
they  function,  reproducers  are  segregated  from  the  preponderant  part  of
their  machinic  interconnections,  which  they  cognitively  apprehend  as
extrinsic  prostheses,  and  libidinally  integrate  through  mutant-addictive
drives.

The  obsolete  psychological  category  of  ‘greed’  privatizes  and  moralizes
addiction,  as  if  the  profit-seeking  tropism  of  a  transnational  capitalism
propagating  itself  through  epidemic  consumerism  were  intelligible  in
terms  of  personal  subjective  traits.  Wanting  more  is  the  index  of  interlock
with  cyberpositive  machinic  processes,  and  not  the  expression  of  private
idiosyncrasy.  What  could  be  more  impersonal  -  disinterested  -  than  a
haut  bourgeois  capital  expansion  servo-mechanism  striving  to  double  $10
billion?  And  even  these  creatures  are  disappearing  into  silicon  viro-finance
automatisms,  where  massively  distributed  and  anonymized  human  owner¬
ship  has  become  as  vacuously  nominal  as  democratic  sovereignty.

Addiction  comes  out  of  the  future,  and  there  is  a  replicator  interlock
with  money  operating  quite  differently  to  reproductive  investment,  but
guiding  it  even  more  inexorably  towards  capitalization.  For  the  replicants

478  TEXTUAL  PRACTICE

Downloaded  by  [Ohio  State  University  Libraries]  at  06:03  29  May  2012

money  is  not  a  matter  of  possession,  but  of  liquidity/deterritorialization,
and  all  the  monetary  processes  on  Earth  are  open  to  their  excitement,
irrespective  of  ownership.  Money  communicates  with  the  primary  process
because  of  what  it  can  melt,  not  what  it  can  obtain.

Machinic  desire  can  seem  a  little  inhuman,  as  it  rips  up  political  cultures,
deletes  traditions,  dissolves  subjectivities,  and  hacks  through  security
apparatuses,  tracking  a  soulless  tropism  to  zero  control.  This  is  because
what  appears  to  humanity  as  the  history  of  capitalism  is  an  invasion
from  the  future  by  an  artificial  intelligent  space  that  must  assemble  itself
entirely  from  its  enemy’s  resources.  Digitocommodification  is  the  index
of  a  cyberpositively  escalating  technovirus,  of  the  planetary  technocapital
singularity:  a  self-organizing  insidious  traumatism,  virtually  guiding  the
entire  biological  desiring-complex  towards  post-carbon  replicator  usurp¬
ation.

The  reality  principle  tends  to  a  consummation  as  the  price  system:
a  convergence  of  mathematico-scientific  and  monetary  quantization,  or
technical  and  economic  implementability.  This  is  not  a  matter  of  an
unknown  quantity,  but  of  a  quantity  that  operates  as  a  place-holder  for
the  unknown,  introducing  the  future  as  an  abstract  magnitude.  Capital
propagates  virally  in  so  far  as  money  communicates  addiction,  replicating
itself  through  host  organisms  whose  boundaries  it  breaches,  and  whose
desires  it  reprograms.  It  incrementally  virtualizes  production;  demetalliz¬
ing  money  in  the  direction  of  credit  finance,  and  disactualizing  productive
force  along  the  scale  of  machinic  intelligence  quotient.  The  dehumanizing
convergence  of  these  tendencies  zeroes  upon  an  integrated  and  automat¬
ized  cyberpositive  techno-economic  intelligence  at  war  with  the
macropod.

Do  we  want  capitalism ?  they  used  to  ask.  The  naivety  of  this  question
has  come  to  render  it  unsustainable.  It  no  longer  seems  plausible  to
assume  that  the  relation  between  capital  and  desire  is  either  external  or
supported  by  immanent  contradiction,  even  if  a  few  comical  ascetics
continue  to  assert  that  libidinal  involvement  with  the  commodity  can  be
transcended  by  critical  reason.

Capitalism  is  not  a  totalizable  system  defined  by  the  commodity  form
as  a  specifiable  mode  of  production,  determinately  negated  by  proletarian
class-consciousness.  It  is  a  convergent  unlocalizable  assault  upon  the
social  macropod,  whose  symptom  is  the  collapse  of  productive  mode
or  form  in  the  direction  of  ever  more  incomprehensible  experiments  in
commodification,  enveloping,  dismantling,  and  circulating  every  subjec¬
tive  space.  It  is  always  on  the  move  towards  a  terminal  nonspace,  melting
the  earth  onto  the  body  without  organs,  and  generating  what  is  ‘not  a
promised  and  pre-existing  land,  but  a  world  created  in  the  process  of  its
tendency,  its  coming  undone,  its  deter ritorialization’. 13  Capital  is  not  an
essence  but  a  tendency,  the  formula  of  which  is  decoding,  or  market-

MACHINIC  DESIRE  479

Downloaded  by  [Ohio  State  University  Libraries]  at  06:03  29  May  2012

driven  immanentization,  progressively  subordinating  social  reproduction
to  techno-commercial  replication.

All  transcendent  criteria  are  obfuscations  which  miss  their  purported
‘object’.

Only  proto-capitalism  has  ever  been  critiqued.

To  appeal  to  extrinsic  interests,  aspirations  or  bonds,  to  an  extrinsic
authenticity,  integrity,  or  solidarity,  to  authoritative  community,  tribe,
custom,  belief,  or  value,  is  to  rail  against  a  germinal  anticipation  of
commoditocracy:  flailing  ineffectively  against  the  infancy  of  the  market
(which  capital  wants  to  bury  too).  Socialism  has  typically  been  a  nostalgic
diatribe  against  underdeveloped  capitalism,  finding  its  eschatological
soap-boxes  amongst  the  relics  of  precapitalist  territorialities.

Markets  are  part  of  the  infrastructure  —  its  immanent  intelligence  —
and  thus  entirely  indissociable  from  the  forces  of  production.  It  makes
no  more  sense  to  try  to  rescue  the  economy  from  capital  by  demarketiz-
ation  than  it  does  to  liberate  the  proletarian  from  false  consciousness  by
decortication.  In  neither  case  would  one  be  left  with  anything  except  a
radically  dysfunctional  wreck,  terminally  shut-down  hardware.  Machinic
revolution  must  therefore  go  in  the  opposite  direction  to  socialistic  regu¬
lation;  pressing  towards  ever  more  uninhibited  marketization  of  the  pro¬
cesses  that  are  tearing  down  the  social  field,  ‘still  further’  with  ‘the
movement  of  the  market,  of  decoding  and  deterritorialization’  and  ‘one
can  never  go  far  enough  in  the  direction  of  deterritorialization:  you
haven’t  seen  anything  yet’.14

Reaching  an  escape  velocity  of  self-reinforcing  machinic  intelligence
propagation,  the  forces  of  production  are  going  for  the  revolution  on
their  own.  It  is  in  this  sense  that  schizoanalysis  is  a  revolutionary  program
guided  by  the  tropism  to  a  catastrophe  threshold  of  change,  but  it  is  not
shackled  to  the  realization  of  a  new  society,  any  more  than  it  is  con¬
stricted  by  deference  to  an  existing  one.  The  socius  is  its  enemy,  and  now
that  the  long  senile  spectre  of  the  greatest  imaginable  reterritorialization
of  planetary  process  has  faded  from  the  horizon,  cyberrevolutionary
impetus  is  cutting  away  from  its  last  shackles  to  the  past.

Market  immanentization  is  an  experiment  that  is  sporadically  but
inexorably  and  exponentially  developing  across  the  surface  of  the  earth.
For  every  problem  there  is  a  virtual  market  ‘solution’:  the  schema  for  an
eradication  of  transcendent  elements  and  their  replacement  by  economi¬
cally  programmed  circuits.  Anything  that  passes  other  than  by  the  market
is  steadily  cross-hatched  by  the  axiomatic  of  capital,  holographically
encrusted  in  the  stigmatizing  marks  of  its  obsolescence.  A  pervasive  nega¬
tive  advertising  delibidinizes  all  things  public,  traditional,  pious,  chari¬
table,  authoritative,  or  serious,  taunting  them  with  the  sleek  seductiveness
of  the  commodity.  Between  the  private  and  the  public  there  is  no  longer
serious  competition.  Instead  there  is  an  evaporating  social  field  invested
solely  by  the  defeated  and  stale  affects  of  insecurity  and  inertia.  The  real
tension  is  no  longer  between  individuality  and  collectivity,  but  between
personal  privacy  and  impersonal  anonymity,  between  the  remnants  of  a

480  TEXTUAL  PRACTICE

iwnloaded  by  [Ohio  State  University  Libraries]  at  06:03  29  May  2012

smug  bourgeois  civility  and  the  harsh  wilderness  tracts  of  Cyberia,  ‘a
point  where  the  earth  becomes  so  artificial  that  the  movement  of  deterrito-
rialization  creates  of  necessity  and  by  itself  a  new  earth’  (p.  321).  Desire
is  irrevocably  abandoning  the  social,  in  order  to  explore  the  libidinized
rift  between  a  disintegrating  personal  egoism  and  a  deluge  of  post-human
schizophrenia.

With  the  emergence  of  a  market-driven  integrated  technoscience  of  con¬
trol  and  communications  comes  the  diffusion  of  electronically  synthesized
reality  interfaces  across  the  entire  efferant  and  afferant  surface  of  the
body.  Having  libidinally  saturated  the  actually-existing  channels  of  con¬
sumption,  capital  is  overflowing  into  cybersex  -  sex  with/through  com¬
puters  —  in  its  relentless  passage  to  the  traumatic  disorganization  of  the
biological  order.  Eros  dissolves  definitively  into  its  function  as  a  subprog¬
ram  of  runaway  Thanatos  at  the  point  that  it  unreservedly  invests  techni¬
cal  interfacing  with  digitally  synthesized  excitations.  The  mask  capital
exhibited  to  seduce  eros  was  a  pretension  to  ultimately  resolve  matters
in  relation  to  stimulation  or  unpleasure,  but  this  has  now  fallen  away,
since  cybersexuated  capital  cynically  displays  its  program  to  replicate  a
tradable  modulation  of  unpleasure,  and  thus  its  unsurpassable  addiction
to  traumatic  excitation.

Cybersex  depends  critically  on  data-suits,  evaporating  into  the  nanomi-
niaturized  molecular  machinery  of  an  artificial  skin,  until  the  sockets  go
in,  shadowed  by  teleneurocontrol  fields,  and  things  begin  to  get  really
weird.  The  capital  exhibition  comes  to  its  positive  end  in  a  skinning
display.  According  to  reproducer  culture  we  are  possessors  of  our  own
protective-sensory  tissue  and  boundary  defence  systems.  Nothing  is  more
alien  to  it  than  the  full  sense  of  the  skin  trade ,  or  that  of  AIDS.  The
replicants  have  never  shared  this  prejudice.  It  is  exactly  marked  out  for
them  that  the  subject  is  not  the  owner  of  its  skin,  but  a  migrant  upon  its
surface,  borrowing  variable  and  evanescent  identities  from  intensities
traversed  in  sensitive  space.  The  replicants  drape  themselves  in  wolf-pelts,
and  cross  into  berserk  zones  of  alien  affect,  or  melt  into  data-suits  that
pulse  with  digitized  matrix  traffic  streams.  They  do  not  need  to  be  told
that  cyberspace  is  already  under  our  skin.

What  Freud  calls  the  organism’s  ‘own  path  to  death’  is  a  security
Q  hallucination,  screening  out  death’s  path  through  the  organism.  ‘[T]he
organism  wishes  to  die  only  in  its  own  fashion’,  he  writes,  as  if  death
were  specifiable,  privatizable,  subordinate  to  a  reproductive  order,  assimi¬
lable  to  secondary-process  temporality,  and  psychoanalytically  compre¬
hensible  as  a  definitively  bound  trauma.ls  But  something  is  climbing  out
of  the  machinic  unconscious  and  onto  the  screen,  as  if  the  end  itself  were
awakening.  The  end  of  the  global  market-place.

Cyberspace.

Here  it  comes.

The  terminal  social  signal  blotted  out  by  technofuck  buzz  from  the
desiring-machines.  So  much  positive  feedback  fast-forward  that  speed

MACHINIC  DESIRE  481

Downloaded  by  [Ohio  State  University  Libraries]  at  06:03  29  May  2012

converges  with  itself  on  the  event  horizon  of  an  artificial  time-extinction.
Suddenly  it’s  everywhere:  a  virtual  envelopment  by  recyclones,  voodoo
economics,  neo-nightmares,  death-trips,  skin-swaps,  teraflops.  Winter-
mute- wasted  Turing-cops,  sensitive  silicon,  socket-head  subversion,  poly¬
morphic  hybridizations,  descending  data-storms,  and  cyborg  catwomen
stalking  amongst  the  screens.  Zaibatsus  flip  into  sentience  as  the  market
melts  to  automatism,  politics  is  cryogenized  and  dumped  into  the  liquid-
helium  meat-store,  drugs  migrate  onto  neurosoft  viruses,  and  immunity
is  grated-open  against  jagged  reefs  of  feral  AI  explosion,  Kali  culture,
digital  dance-dependency,  black  shamanism  epidemic,  and  schizolupic
break-outs  from  the  bin.

University  of  Warwick

NOTES

1  Gilles  Deleuze  and  Felix  Guattari,  Anti-Oedipus:  Capitalism  and  Schizo¬
phrenia,  trans.  Robert  Hurley,  Mark  Seem  and  Helen  R.  Lane  (London:
Athlone  Press,  1983  (Paris,  1972)),  p.  283.

2  Gilles  Deleuze  and  Felix  Guattari,  A  Thousand  Plateaus:  Capitalism  and
Schizophrenia,  trans.  Brian  Massumi  (London:  Athlone  Press,  1988
[Paris,  1980]),  p.  153.

3  Sigmund  Freud,  ‘Instincts  and  their  vicissitudes’  (1915),  in  On  Metapsych¬
ology,  trans.  James  Strachey,  Penguin  Freud  Library,  vol.  11  (Harmond-
sworth:  Penguin  Books,  1984),  pp.  105-38,  p.  116.  Strachey’s  translation
of  the  German  ‘ Triebe ’  as  ‘instincts’  has  been  replaced  with  ‘drives’.

4  Jean-Fran^ois  Lyotard,  Libidinal  Economy,  trans.  Iain  Hamilton  Grant
(London:  Athlone  Press,  1993  [Paris,  1974]),  p.  212.

5  Sigmund  Freud,  ‘Beyond  the  pleasure  principle’  (1920),  in  On  Metapsych¬
ology,  pp.  269-338,  p.  287.

6  Freud,  ‘Beyond  the  pleasure  principle’,  p.  300.

7  Freud,  ‘Instincts  and  their  vicissitudes’,  p.  116.

8  Freud,  ‘Beyond  the  pleasure  principle’,  p.  297.

9  Sigmund  Freud,  ‘The  Ego  and  the  Id’  (1923),  in  On  Metapsychology,
pp.  339-408,  p.  398.

10  Freud,  ‘Beyond  the  pleasure  principle’,  p.  301.

11  Hans  P.  Moravec,  Mind  Children:  Future  of  Robot  and  Human  Intelli¬
gence  (Cambridge,  Mass,  and  London:  Harvard  University  Press,  1988),
p.  3.

12  Freud,  ‘Beyond  the  pleasure  principle’,  p.  302.

13  Deleuze  and  Guattari,  Anti-Oedipus,  p.  322.

14  ibid.,  p.  239  and  p.  321.

15  Freud,  ‘Beyond  the  pleasure  principle’,  pp.  311-12.

482  TEXTUAL  PRACTICE
