DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST DECADE OF TITUS LIVIUS

by Niccolo Machiavelli

BOOK I

INTRODUCTION

With what difficulty a new way and method is established.

Although the envious nature of men, so prompt to blame and so slow to praise, makes the discovery and introduction of any new principles and systems as dangerous almost as the exploration of unknown seas and continents, yet, animated by that desire which impels me to do what may prove for the common benefit of all, I have resolved to open a new route, which has not yet been followed by any one, and may prove difficult and troublesome, but may also bring me some reward in the approbation of those who will kindly appreciate my efforts.

And if my poor talents, my little experience of the present and insufficient study of the past, should make the result of my labors defective and of little utility, I shall at least have shown the way to others, who, with more ability and eloquence, will more effectually achieve this new design; so that if I gain no merit from this enterprise, I ought at least not to incur any censure.

When I consider the general respect for antiquity, and how often—to say nothing of other examples—a great price is paid for some fragments of an antique statue, which we are anxious to possess to ornament our houses with, or to give to artists who strive to imitate them in their own works; and when I see, on the other hand, the wonderful examples which the history of ancient kingdoms and republics presents to us, the prodigies of virtue and wisdom displayed by the kings, captains, citizens, and legislators who have sacrificed themselves for their country,—when I see these, I say, more admired than imitated, or so much neglected that not the least trace of this ancient virtue remains, I cannot but be at the same time as much surprised as afflicted. And this is the more astonishing when I recall how much we respect the judgments of antiquity in our civil cases, which are but the decisions given by the ancient jurisconsults, and which, reduced to a system, direct our modern jurists in their decisions. And what is the science of medicine, but the experience of ancient physicians, which their successors have taken for their guide? And yet to found a republic, maintain states, to govern a kingdom, organize an army, conduct a war, dispense justice, and extend empires, you will find neither prince, nor republic, nor captain, nor citizen, who has recourse to the examples of antiquity! This neglect, I think, is due not so much to the weakness to which our education has reduced us, or to the evils that a proud indolence has produced in many Christian states, as to the want of a proper appreciation of history, which leads men to misunderstand the meaning of what they read, and to fail to draw from it the practical lessons it conveys. Hence it happens that the majority of those who read history take pleasure only in the variety of the events which history relates, without ever conceiving the idea of imitating the noble actions, deeming that not only difficult, but impossible; as though heaven, the sun, the elements, and men had changed the order of their motions and power, and were different from what they were in ancient times.

Wishing, then, to correct this error, I have thought it proper to write upon those books of Titus Livius that have come to us entire despite the malice of time; and in doing this I shall follow the natural order of facts, and compare ancient with modern events, and think proper to add such observations as will make the meaning of that historian more apparent. So that those who read these my Discourses may be able to derive from them that practical utility which should be the aim of all study of history. And although this enterprise is difficult, yet, with the help of those who have encouraged me in it, I hope to carry it to such a conclusion that but little may remain for others to do to bring it to its destined end.

CHAPTER I.

Of the beginning of cities in general, and especially that of the city of Rome.

Those who read how the city of Rome had its beginning, and who established its laws and institutions, will not be surprised that so much virtue had been maintained there for so many centuries, and that it acquired such power and became so great an empire.

In discussing the origin of cities, we must distinguish between those that have been built by natives of the country, and those built by strangers.

The first case occurs when the inhabitants, dispersed in many small parties, find themselves insecure, not being able individually to protect themselves against the attacks of their enemies; and on the other hand not having time, when the enemy is upon them, to unite for their common defense, or being likely to lose their homes if they do so; they therefore resolve to unite, and for their better protection to settle in some place that offers greater conveniences for living, and can be more easily defended.

...

CHAPTER II.

Of the different kinds of republics, and of what kind the Roman Republic was.

I will leave aside what might be said of cities which from their very birth have been subject to a foreign power, and will speak only of those whose origin has been independent of any external authority, but which have governed themselves according to their own will, either as republics or as principalities; and as these had different origins, so they have had different laws and institutions. For to some, at the very beginning, or soon after, laws were given by some one man and all at one time, like those given by Lycurgus to the Spartans; while to others they were given at different times, as occasion required, as was the case with Rome. That republic, indeed, may be called happy which produces a man so prudent and sagacious that he may enact laws which, without need of alteration, may secure the security of those who live under them. Sparta, for instance, observed her laws for more than eight hundred years without changing them and without experiencing any dangerous disturbance. Unhappy, on the contrary, is that city which, not having had a wise legislator at the beginning, is obliged to reorganize itself; and unhappier still is that which has started wrong; and that may be said to have started wrong which has not based its laws and institutions upon such a foundation as to be able to secure liberty and power. A state of this kind can with difficulty be firmly established. Those, however, that have started without a perfect constitution, but have made a fair beginning, and are capable of improvement, may become perfect by the aid of events. It is true, however, that such reforms are never effected without danger, for the majority of men never willingly adopt any new law tending to change the constitution of the state, unless the necessity of the change is demonstrated by the actual state of things; and as such a necessity cannot make itself felt without being accompanied with danger, the republic may easily be destroyed before having perfected its constitution. That of Florence is a striking proof of this; reorganized after the revolt of Arezzo, in 1502, it was overthrown after the taking of Prato, in 1512.

...

I say, then, that all these six modes of government are defects, the three first being too temporary, and the three others being bad in themselves. The wise legislators, knowing these defects, refrained from adopting as such any one of these forms, and chose instead one that shared in them all, since they thought such a government would be stronger and more stable, for if in one and the same state there was principality, aristocracy, and democracy each would keep watch over the other.

CHAPTER XI

OF THE RELIGION OF THE ROMANS

Although Rome had Romulus for her first founder, and as a daughter owed him her being and her nurture, yet the heavens, judging that the institutions of Romulus were not sufficient for so great an empire, inspired the Roman Senate to elect Numa Pompilius as his successor, so that the things omitted by Romulus might be supplied by Numa. He, finding a very savage people, and wishing to reduce them to civil obedience by the arts of peace, had recourse to religion as the most necessary and assured support of any civil society; and he established it upon such foundations that for many centuries there was nowhere more fear of the gods than in that republic, which greatly facilitated all the enterprises which the Senate or its great men attempted. Whoever examines the actions of the people of Rome as a body, or of many individual Romans, will see that they feared much more to break an oath than the laws; like men who esteem the power of the gods more than that of men.

...

And as the observance of divine worship is the cause of greatness in republics, so the neglect of it is the cause of their ruin. For where the fear of God is wanting, there the kingdom must either be ruined, or be sustained by the fear of a prince who supplies the defects of religion. And because princes are short-lived, it is most likely that the kingdom will fail as soon as the virtue of the prince fails.
