I. THE DIVINE PERFECTION AND THAT GOD DOES EVERYTHING IN THE MOST DESIRABLE WAY

The conception of God which is the most common and the most full of meaning is that which presents him as an absolutely perfect being. But the consequences of this are not yet sufficiently well understood; and in order to get at them, there is need of remarking that there are several entirely different kinds of perfection, that God possesses all of them together, and that each of them belongs to him in the highest degree.

We must also know what perfection is. One thing is surely more perfect than another if it has more of essence or reality. For perfection is nothing but the quantity of essence or reality.

Thus, since God is the supreme cause, he must be the author of the existence of effects; but since he is also the supreme reason, he must be the author of their essence or of their nature, which is nothing else than their capacity for existence, just as the number of sides and the equality of the angles is the nature of the square.

It is for this reason that God is the author of all the realities which are in contingent things, and that he is the source of all the possibilities which are in necessary things.

But we must not imagine that the eternal truths, being dependent on God, are arbitrary and depend on his will, as Descartes seems to have held, and afterwards M. Poiret. This is true only of contingent truths, of which the principle is fitness or the choice of the best, whereas necessary truths depend solely on his understanding and are its internal object.

Thus God alone is the primary unity or original simple substance, of which all created or derivative Monads are products and have their birth, so to speak, through continual fulgurations of the Divinity from moment to moment, limited by the receptivity of the created being, of which it is essentially finite.

II. AGAINST THOSE WHO HOLD THAT THERE IS IN THE WORKS OF GOD NO GOODNESS, OR THAT THE PRINCIPLES OF GOODNESS AND BEAUTY ARE ARBITRARY

Therefore I am far from the opinion of those who maintain that there are no principles of goodness or perfection in the nature of things, or in the ideas which God has about them, and who say that the works of God are good only through the formal reason that God has made them. If this position were true, God, knowing that he is the author of things, would not have to regard them afterwards and find them good, as the Holy Scripture witnesses. Such anthropomorphism is merely a way of saying that the excellence of the works is recognized by regarding the works themselves, or even the possible works.

III. AGAINST THOSE WHO THINK THAT GOD MIGHT HAVE MADE THINGS BETTER THAN HE HAS

And I am even further removed from the sentiments of those who think that there are no rules of goodness and perfection in the nature of things, or in the ideas which God has of them, and who say that the works of God are good only for the formal reason that God made them.

For if this were so, God, who knows that He is the author of things, would not have to look at his work and find it good, as the Holy Scripture testifies. This anthropomorphism serves to show that the excellence of the work is recognized by considering the work itself, without reference to the workman.

To say that God makes things good by a simple decree of his will, and not because there is in them a reason for goodness, is to destroy the love of God and his glory. For why praise him for what he has done, if he would be equally praiseworthy in doing the contrary? Where will be his justice and his wisdom if he has only a certain despotic power, if arbitrary will takes the place of reasonableness, and if in accord with the definition of tyrants, justice consists in that which is pleasing to the most powerful? Besides it seems that every act of willing supposes some reason for the willing and this reason, of course, must precede the act. This is why, accordingly, I find so strange those expressions of some philosophers who say that the eternal truths of metaphysics and Geometry, and consequently the principles of goodness, of justice, and of perfection, are effects only of the will of God. To me it seems that all these follow from his understanding, which does not depend upon his will any more than does his essence.
