DISCOURSE ON METAPHYSICS

I. ON THE DIVINE PERFECTION AND THAT GOD DOES EVERYTHING IN THE MOST DESIRABLE WAY.

The conception of God which is the most common and the most full of meaning is that which expresses itself in the terms: God is an absolutely perfect being. The consequences, however, have not yet been sufficiently drawn from it. And in order to penetrate more deeply into this matter it is appropriate to remark that there are several entirely different perfections in nature, that God possesses all of them together, and that each belongs to him in the highest degree.

We must also know what perfection is. One thing which can be capable of the highest degree must be of this sort, otherwise the nature of the thing as the number or the figure does not admit of it perfect. But the greatest and the highest are not the same thing. The greatest implies a relation to the others, the highest is an absolute term.

But since God is the most perfect and the most knowing spirit, it is evident that he does the most perfect and the most knowing things. It is necessary to consider also that the more we know the things, the more we find them beautiful and conformable to the desires of a wise nature.

II. AGAINST THOSE WHO HOLD THAT THERE IS NO GOODNESS IN THE WORKS OF GOD; OR THAT THE RULES OF GOODNESS AND BEAUTY ARE ARBITRARY.

Thus I am far from the opinion of those who maintain that there are no rules of goodness and perfection in the nature of things, or in the ideas which God has of them, and that the works of God are good only for the formal reason that God has made them. For if that were so, God, knowing that he is the author of things, would not have to regard them afterwards and find them good, as the Holy Scripture witnesses. Such anthropology, which is used only to make men know that they must be satisfied with what God has done, seems to me not sufficiently worthy of him, since he does everything for the best, not by a necessity of nature, but by the choice of a perfectly wise will.

III. AGAINST THOSE WHO THINK THAT GOD MIGHT HAVE MADE THINGS BETTER THAN HE HAS.

I cannot approve the opinion of some moderns who maintain boldly that that which God has made is not in the highest degree of perfection, and that he might have done better. For it seems to me that the consequences of this sentiment are entirely contrary to the glory of God. Uti minus malum habet rationem boni, ita minus bonum habet rationem mali. And to act with less perfection than one is capable of, is to act imperfectly. To show that an architect could have done better is to find fault with his work. Furthermore this opinion is contrary to the Holy Scripture, which assures us of the goodness of God's works.

IV. THAT LOVE FOR GOD DEMANDS ON OUR PART COMPLETE SATISFACTION WITH AND ACQUIESCENCE IN THAT WHICH HE HAS DONE.

The general knowledge of this great truth that God acts always in the most perfect and most desirable manner possible, is in my opinion the basis of the love which we owe to God in all things; for he who loves seeks his satisfaction in the felicity or perfection of the object loved and in the perfection of his actions. To wish, indeed, that God had done better, is to wish that he were more perfect. We must therefore be satisfied with the order of the past, for the reason that we know that it is in conformity with the absolute will of God, which is known to us by the event.

V. IN WHAT THE RULES OF PERFECTION OF THE DIVINE CONDUCT CONSIST, AND THAT THE SIMPLICITY OF THE WAYS IS IN BALANCE WITH THE RICHNESS OF THE EFFECTS.

It is sufficient to say that God, having chosen the most perfect world, has acted in the most perfect manner, not only metaphysically, but also morally speaking. But regarding the physical perfection, it is more difficult to explain exactly wherein it consists. I believe that one can say that he who acts perfectly is like an excellent Geometer who knows how to find the best construction for a problem; like a good architect who makes use of his location and the funds destined for the building in the most advantageous manner, leaving nothing which implies anything rude or devoid of beauty; like a good householder, who employs his property in such a way that there shall be nothing useless, nothing incapable of sowing, or incapable of yielding fruit; like a skilled machinist who produces his work in the easiest way possible; and like a learned author who includes the greatest number of truths in the smallest possible volume.
