1. The Monad, of which we shall here speak, is merely a simple substance entering into those which are compound; simple, that is to say, without parts.

2. And there must be simple substances, since there are compounds; for a compound is nothing but a collection or aggregatum of simple things.

3. Now where there are no parts, there can be neither extension nor form nor divisibility. These Monads are the real atoms of nature and in a word the elements of things.

4. No dissolution of these elements need be feared, and there is no conceivable way in which a simple substance can be perished by natural means.

5. For the same reason there is no conceivable way in which a simple substance can be begun by natural means.

6. One may say that Monads cannot begin or end otherwise than all at once, that is to say, they can begin only by creation and end only by annihilation; whereas that which is compound begins or ends by parts.

7. There is also no way of explaining how a Monad can be altered in quality or internally changed by any other created thing; since it is impossible to change the place of anything in it or to conceive in it any internal motion which could be produced, directed, increased or diminished therein, although all this is possible in that which is compound, where there are parts which change among themselves. The Monads have no windows, through which anything could come in or go out. Accidents cannot separate themselves from substances nor go about outside of them, as the 'sensible species' of the Scholastics used to do. Thus neither substance nor accident can enter a Monad from without.

8. Yet the Monads must have some qualities, otherwise they would not even be existing things. And if simple substances did not differ from each other, there would be no way of perceiving any change in things; for what is in the compound can come only from the simple elements it contains, and the Monads, if they had no qualities, would be indistinguishable from one another, since they do not differ in quantity. Consequently, space being a plenum, each place would always receive, in any motion, exactly the equivalent of what it already had, and one state of things would be indistinguishable from another.

9. Indeed, each Monad must be different from every other. For in nature there are never two beings which are perfectly alike and in which it is not possible to find an internal difference, or at least a difference founded upon an intrinsic quality.

10. I assume also as admitted that every created being, and consequently the created Monad, is subject to change, and further that this change is continuous in each.

11. It follows from what has just been said, that the natural changes of the Monads come from an internal principle, since an external cause can have no influence upon their inner being.

12. But, besides the principle of the change, there must be a detail of that which changes, which, so to speak, makes up the specific nature and variety of the simple substances.

13. This detail should imply a multitude in the unity or simple substance. For as every natural change takes place by degrees, something changes and something remains; and consequently there must be a plurality of affections and relations in the simple substance, although it has no parts.

14. The passing condition, which involves and represents a multitude in the unity or in the simple substance, is nothing but what is called Perception, which is to be distinguished from Apperception or Consciousness, as will appear in what follows. In this matter the Cartesian view is extremely defective, for it treats as non-existent those perceptions of which we are not consciously aware. This has also led them to believe that minds alone are Monads, and that there are no souls of animals nor other Entelechies.

15. The action of the internal principle which causes the change or the passage from one perception to another, may be called Appetition; it is true that appetite cannot always fully attain to the whole perception at which it aims, but it always obtains some of it and attains to new perceptions.

16. We have in ourselves experience of a multitude in simple substance, when we find that the least thought of which we are conscious involves variety in its object. Thus all those who admit that the soul is a simple substance should admit this multitude in the Monad; and M. Bayle ought not to have found any difficulty in this, as he has done in his Dictionary, article 'Rorarius'.
