Biography of Michel de Montaigne

Michel Eyquem de Montaigne (28 February 1533 – 13 September 1592) was one of the most significant philosophers of the French Renaissance, known for popularizing the essay as a literary genre. His work is noted for its merging of casual anecdotes and autobiography with serious intellectual insight; his massive volume Essais contains some of the most influential essays ever written.

Montaigne was born in the Aquitaine region of France, on the family estate Château de Montaigne, in a town now named Saint-Michel-de-Montaigne, close to Bordeaux. The family was very wealthy; his great-grandfather, Ramon Felipe Eyquem, had made a fortune as a herring merchant and had bought the estate in 1477, thus becoming the Lord of Montaigne.

Montaigne's education was designed to follow a plan created by his father, Pierre Eyquem, and refined by humanist friends. Soon after his birth, Montaigne was brought to a small cottage, where he lived the first three years of life in the sole company of a peasant family, in order to "draw the boy close to the people, and to the life conditions of the people, who need our help". After these first spartan years, Montaigne was brought back to the château. The objective was for Latin to become his first language.

The Essais

His massive volume Essais (translated literally as "Attempts" or "Trials") contains some of the most influential essays ever written. Montaigne wrote in a crafted rhetoric designed to intrigue and involve the reader, sometimes appearing to move in a stream-of-thought from topic to topic and at other times employing a structured style which gives more emphasis to the didactic nature of his work. His arguments are often supported with quotations from Ancient Greek, Latin, and Italian texts such as De rerum natura by Lucretius and the works of Plutarch. Furthermore, his essays were seen as an attempt to explore himself as he wrote, "I am myself the matter of my book".

Montaigne's influence, via Shakespeare, René Descartes, Ralph Waldo Emerson, Stefan Zweig, Friedrich Nietzsche, Jean-Jacques Rousseau, Isaac Asimov, and perhaps famously in his own time, Francis Bacon, is monumental.

He died of quinsy at the age of 59, in 1592 at the Château de Montaigne.
