PART II. OF THE NATURE AND ORIGIN OF THE MIND.

PREFACE.

I now pass on to explaining those things which must necessarily follow from the essence of God, or of the eternal and infinite being; not, indeed, all of them (for we proved in Part I., Prop. xvi., that an infinite number of things must follow in an infinite number of ways), but only those that are able to lead us, as it were by the hand, to the knowledge of the human mind and its highest blessedness.

DEFINITIONS.

I. By body I mean a mode which expresses in a certain determinate manner the essence of God, in so far as he is considered as an extended thing. (See Part I., Prop. xxv. Coroll.)

II. I consider as belonging to the essence of a thing that, which being given, the thing is necessarily given also, and, which being removed, the thing is necessarily removed also; in other words, that without which the thing, and which itself without the thing, can neither be nor be conceived.

III. By idea, I mean the mental conception which is formed by the mind as a thinking thing.

Explanation.—I say conception rather than perception, because the word perception seems to imply that the mind is passive in respect to the object; whereas conception seems to express an activity of the mind.

PROP. VII. The order and connection of ideas is the same as the order and connection of things.
Proof.—This is evident from Ax. iv. Part I. For the idea of everything that is caused depends on a knowledge of the cause of which it is an effect.

PROP. XLVIII. In the mind there is no absolute or free will; but the mind is determined to wish this or that by a cause, which has also been determined by another cause, and this last by another cause, and so on to infinity.
Proof.—The mind is a fixed and definite mode of thought (Prop. xi.), therefore it cannot be the free cause of its actions; in other words, it cannot have an absolute faculty of positive or negative volition; but it must be determined by a cause, which has also been determined by another cause, and this last by another cause, and so on to infinity. Q.E.D.
