PART II. CONCERNING THE NATURE AND ORIGIN OF THE MIND

PREFACE.

I now proceed to explain those things which must necessarily follow from the essence of God, or of the eternal and infinite being; not, indeed, all of them (for we proved in Part I., Prop. xvi., that an infinite number of things must follow from the divine nature), but only those that are able to lead us, as it were by the hand, to the knowledge of the human mind and its highest blessedness.

DEFINITIONS.

I. By body I mean a mode which expresses in a certain determinate manner the essence of God, in so far as he is considered as an extended thing. (See Pt. I., Prop. xxv., Coroll.)

II. I consider as belonging to the essence of a thing that, which being given, the thing is necessarily given also, and, which being removed, the thing is necessarily removed also; in other words, that without which the thing, and which itself without the thing, can neither be nor be conceived.

III. By idea, I mean the mental conception which is formed by the mind as a thinking thing.

Explanation.—I say conception rather than perception, because the word perception seems to imply that the mind is passive in respect to the object; whereas conception seems to express an activity of the mind.

IV. By an adequate idea, I mean an idea which, in so far as it is considered in itself, without relation to the object, has all the properties or intrinsic marks of a true idea.

Explanation.—I say intrinsic, in order to exclude that mark which is extrinsic, namely, the agreement between the idea and its object (ideatum).

V. Duration is the indefinite continuance of existence.

Explanation.—I say indefinite, because it cannot be determined through the existence itself of the existing thing, or by its efficient cause, which necessarily gives the existence of the thing, but does not take it away.

VI. Reality and perfection I use as synonymous terms.

VII. By particular things, I mean things which are finite and have a conditioned existence; but if several individual things concur in one action, so as to be all together the simultaneous cause of one effect, I consider them all so far as one particular thing.

PROPOSITIONS.

PROP. I. Thought is an attribute of God, or God is a thinking thing.
Proof.—Particular thoughts, or this and that thought, are modes which, in a certain conditioned manner, express the nature of God (Pt. I., Prop. xxv., Coroll.). God therefore possesses the attribute (Pt. I., Def. v.) of which the concept is involved in all particular thoughts, which latter are conceived therein. Thought, therefore, is one of the infinite attributes of God, which express God's eternal and infinite essence (Pt. I., Def. vi.). In other words, God is a thinking thing. Q.E.D.

PROP. II. Extension is an attribute of God, or God is an extended thing.
Proof.—The proof of this proposition is similar to that of the last.

PROP. VII. The order and connection of ideas is the same as the order and connection of things.
Proof.—This is evident from Pt. I., Ax. iv. For the idea of everything that is caused depends on a knowledge of the cause of which it is an effect.
