When Alexander the Great came to visit Diogenes, he found the philosopher sunning himself. Alexander, standing over him, said, "Ask of me whatever you wish." Diogenes replied, "Stand a little out of my sun." Alexander was so impressed that he said, "If I were not Alexander, I would wish to be Diogenes."

Someone took him into a magnificent house and warned him not to spit, whereupon, having cleared his throat, he discharged the phlegm into the man's face, being unable, he said, to find a meaner receptacle.

He would often go about in broad daylight with a lamp. When asked what he was doing, he would answer, "I am looking for a man."

When asked where he came from, he said, "I am a citizen of the world (kosmopolitēs)."

Seeing a child drinking out of his hands, he threw away the cup from his wallet, saying, "That child has beaten me in simplicity." He also threw away his spoon when he saw a boy eating his lentil soup with a piece of bread.

Plato had defined Man as an animal, biped and featherless, and was applauded. Diogenes plucked a fowl and brought it into the lecture-room with the words, "Here is Plato's man." In consequence of which there was added to the definition, "having broad nails."

When asked what he had gained from philosophy, he replied, "This at least, if nothing else -- to be prepared for every fortune."

Once he saw the officials of a temple leading away some one who had stolen a bowl belonging to the treasurers, and said, "The great thieves are leading away the little thief."

He was once asked what time it was proper to eat. He replied: "If a rich man, when you will; if a poor man, when you can."

Being asked what was the most beautiful thing in the world, he replied, "Freedom of speech."

When some one reminded him that the people of Sinope had sentenced him to exile, he said, "And I sentenced them to stay at home."

He lit a lamp in broad daylight and said, "I am looking for a man."

When asked why people give to beggars but not to philosophers, he said, "Because they think they may one day be lame or blind, but never expect that they will turn to philosophy."

To one who asked what was the proper time for lunch, he said, "If a rich man, when you will; if a poor man, when you can."

When asked what wine he found most pleasant to drink, he replied, "That for which other people pay."

He used to say that other dogs bit their enemies, but I bite my friends to save them.

Seeing a youth dressing with elaborate care, he said, "If it's for men, you're a fool; if for women, a knave."
