Sayings and Anecdotes of Diogenes of Sinope

When someone asked him what was the proper time for lunch, he said, "If a rich man, when you will; if a poor man, when you can."

Seeing a child drinking out of his hands, he threw away the cup from his wallet, saying, "A child has beaten me in plainness of living." He also threw away his bowl when in like manner he saw a child who had broken his plate taking up his lentils with the hollow part of a morsel of bread.

He used to say that it was the curse of the gods to need everything, but the nearest approach to the gods to need nothing.

When asked where he came from, he said, "I am a citizen of the world."

When Alexander the Great stood over him and asked, "Ask of me whatever you want," he replied, "Stand out of my sunlight."

He lit a lamp in broad daylight and said, as he went about, "I am looking for a man."

When someone struck him with a beam and then said, "Look out," he asked, "Are you going to hit me again?"

He used to call demagogues the mob's lackeys.

When asked what was the most beautiful thing in the world, he replied, "Freedom of speech."

He once begged alms of a statue, and, when asked why he did so, replied, "To get practice in being refused."

When asked why people give to beggars but not to philosophers, he said, "Because they think they may one day become lame or blind, but never expect that they will turn to philosophy."

To one who asked what was the right time to marry, Diogenes replied, "For a young man not yet: for an old man never at all."

When he was sunning himself in the Craneum, Alexander stood over him and said, "Ask of me any boon you like." To which he replied, "Stand out of my light."

Plato defined man as an animal, biped and featherless, and was applauded. Diogenes plucked a fowl and brought it into the lecture-room with the words, "Here is Plato's man."

He saw a woman bowing before the gods in an unseemly attitude, and wishing to rid her of superstition, as Zoilus of Perga says, he went up to her and said, "Are you not afraid, my good woman, that a god may be standing behind you--for all things are full of his presence--and you may be put to shame?"

He used to say that there were two kinds of exercise: that of the mind and that of the body; and that the latter of these created in the mind such quick and agile phantasies at the time of its performance, as very much facilitated the practice of virtue; but that one was imperfect without the other, since the health and vigour necessary for the practice of what is good, depend equally on both mind and body.

He was going into a theatre, meeting face to face those who were coming out, and being asked why, "This," he said, "is what I practise doing all my life."

He saw a young man behaving effeminately: "Are you not ashamed," he said, "that your own nature has made you a man, and that you are forcing yourself to play the woman?"

Being asked what he had gained from philosophy, he replied, "This at least, if nothing else--to be prepared for every fortune."

When someone said to him, "You are an old man; rest," "What?" he replied, "If I were running in the stadium, ought I to slacken my pace when approaching the goal? ought I not rather put on speed?"

He saw a youth dressing with elaborate care: "If it's for men," he said, "you're a fool; if for women, a knave."

Someone asked him what was the most miserable thing in life, and he replied, "An old man destitute."

When asked what creature bites the worst, he said, "Of wild beasts the sycophant, of tame beasts the flatterer."

Seeing a fop, he said to him, "A fine tunic, but a filthy soul."

He was breakfasting in the marketplace, and the bystanders gathered round him with cries of "dog." "It is you who are dogs," cried he, "when you stand round and watch me at my breakfast."

When asked what wine he found pleasant to drink, he replied, "That for which other people pay."

When he was sold as a slave, he was asked what he could do: "Govern men," he replied; and he told the crier to shout in case anyone wanted to buy a master.

To one who reproached him with his exile, "Nay," said he, "it was through that, you miserable fellow, that I came to be a philosopher."

When he saw the officials of a temple leading away some one who had stolen a bowl belonging to the treasurers, he said, "The great thieves are leading away the little thief."

One day he got into a half-pitcher and rolled it over the sand. When asked what he was doing, he answered, "I am rolling my pitcher, that I may not appear the only idle man among so many busy ones."

He said that the love of money was the mother-city of all evils.

When asked what was the best thing among men, he said, "Freedom of speech."

He was asked what was the difference between life and death: "No difference," said he. "Well then," said the questioner, "why do you not die?" "Because," said he, "there is no difference."

He once saw a child drinking out of his hands, and threw away the cup from his wallet, saying, "A child has beaten me in plainness of living."

Of the golden statue of Phryne at Delphi, he said, "It stands there as a monument of the incontinence of Greece."

Once he saw a man washing himself and said, "I wonder if the water which cleanses all things can itself be cleansed."

He would walk upon snow and hug statues to train himself for suffering.

He said that men compete in digging and kicking (athletics), but no one competes in being good and noble.

He was surprised that musicians should tune their strings but leave the dispositions of their souls discordant; that mathematicians should gaze at the sun and the moon, but overlook matters close at their feet; that orators should make a fuss about justice in their speeches, but never practise it; or that misers should cry out against money as an evil, while they are fond of it above all things.

When someone brought a child to him and said he was highly gifted and of excellent character, "What need has he of me then?" said he.

He used to say that he followed the example of the trainers of choruses; for they too set the note a little high, to ensure that the rest should hit the right note.

He was asked why he went about with a lamp in broad daylight, and answered, "I am looking for a man."

When a man reproached him for going into unclean places, he said, "The sun too penetrates into privies, but is not polluted by them."
