My purpose here is to offer a defence of existentialism against several
   reproaches that have been laid against it.

   First, it has been reproached as an invitation to people to dwell in
   quietism of despair. For if every way to a solution is barred, one
   would have to regard any action in this world as entirely ineffective,
   and one would arrive finally at a contemplative philosophy. Moreover,
   since contemplation is a luxury, this would be only another bourgeois
   philosophy. This is, especially, the reproach made by the Communists.

   From another quarter we are reproached for having underlined all that
   is ignominious in the human situation, for depicting what is mean,
   sordid or base to the neglect of certain things that possess charm and
   beauty and belong to the brighter side of human nature: for example,
   according to the Catholic critic, Mlle. Mercier, we forget how an
   infant smiles. Both from this side and from the other we are also
   reproached for leaving out of account the solidarity of mankind and
   considering man in isolation. And this, say the Communists, is because
   we base our doctrine upon pure subjectivity – upon the Cartesian “I
   think”: which is the moment in which solitary man attains to himself; a
   position from which it is impossible to regain solidarity with other
   men who exist outside of the self. The ego cannot reach them through
   the cogito.

   From the Christian side, we are reproached as people who deny the
   reality and seriousness of human affairs. For since we ignore the
   commandments of God and all values prescribed as eternal, nothing
   remains but what is strictly voluntary. Everyone can do what he likes,
   and will be incapable, from such a point of view, of condemning either
   the point of view or the action of anyone else.

   It is to these various reproaches that I shall endeavour to reply
   today; that is why I have entitled this brief exposition
   “Existentialism is a Humanism.” Many may be surprised at the mention of
   humanism in this connection, but we shall try to see in what sense we
   understand it. In any case, we can begin by saying that existentialism,
   in our sense of the word, is a doctrine that does render human life
   possible; a doctrine, also, which affirms that every truth and every
   action imply both an environment and a human subjectivity. The
   essential charge laid against us is, of course, that of over-emphasis
   upon the evil side of human life. I have lately been told of a lady
   who, whenever she lets slip a vulgar expression in a moment of
   nervousness, excuses herself by exclaiming, “I believe I am becoming an
   existentialist.” So it appears that ugliness is being identified with
   existentialism. That is why some people say we are “naturalistic,” and
   if we are, it is strange to see how much we scandalise and horrify
   them, for no one seems to be much frightened or humiliated nowadays by
   what is properly called naturalism. Those who can quite well keep down
   a novel by Zola such as La Terre are sickened as soon as they read an
   existentialist novel. Those who appeal to the wisdom of the people –
   which is a sad wisdom – find ours sadder still. And yet, what could be
   more disillusioned than such sayings as “Charity begins at home” or
   “Promote a rogue and he’ll sue you for damage, knock him down and he’ll
   do you homage”? We all know how many common sayings can be quoted to
   this effect, and they all mean much the same – that you must not oppose
   the powers that be; that you must not fight against superior force;
   must not meddle in matters that are above your station. Or that any
   action not in accordance with some tradition is mere romanticism; or
   that any undertaking which has not the support of proven experience is
   foredoomed to frustration; and that since experience has shown men to
   be invariably inclined to evil, there must be firm rules to restrain
   them, otherwise we shall have anarchy. It is, however, the people who
   are forever mouthing these dismal proverbs and, whenever they are told
   of some more or less repulsive action, say “How like human nature!” –
   it is these very people, always harping upon realism, who complain that
   existentialism is too gloomy a view of things. Indeed their excessive
   protests make me suspect that what is annoying them is not so much our
   pessimism, but, much more likely, our optimism. For at bottom, what is
   alarming in the doctrine that I am about to try to explain to you is –
   is it not? – that it confronts man with a possibility of choice. To
   verify this, let us review the whole question upon the strictly
   philosophic level. What, then, is this that we call existentialism?

   Most of those who are making use of this word would be highly confused
   if required to explain its meaning. For since it has become
   fashionable, people cheerfully declare that this musician or that
   painter is “existentialist.” A columnist in Clartes signs himself “The
   Existentialist,” and, indeed, the word is now so loosely applied to so
   many things that it no longer means anything at all. It would appear
   that, for the lack of any novel doctrine such as that of surrealism,
   all those who are eager to join in the latest scandal or movement now
   seize upon this philosophy in which, however, they can find nothing to
   their purpose. For in truth this is of all teachings the least
   scandalous and the most austere: it is intended strictly for
   technicians and philosophers. All the same, it can easily be defined.