The question is only complicated because there are two kinds of
   existentialists. There are, on the one hand, the Christians, amongst
   whom I shall name Jaspers and Gabriel Marcel, both professed Catholics;
   and on the other the existential atheists, amongst whom we must place
   Heidegger as well as the French existentialists and myself. What they
   have in common is simply the fact that they believe that existence
   comes before essence – or, if you will, that we must begin from the
   subjective. What exactly do we mean by that?

   If one considers an article of manufacture as, for example, a book or a
   paper-knife – one sees that it has been made by an artisan who had a
   conception of it; and he has paid attention, equally, to the conception
   of a paper-knife and to the pre-existent technique of production which
   is a part of that conception and is, at bottom, a formula. Thus the
   paper-knife is at the same time an article producible in a certain
   manner and one which, on the other hand, serves a definite purpose, for
   one cannot suppose that a man would produce a paper-knife without
   knowing what it was for. Let us say, then, of the paperknife that its
   essence – that is to say the sum of the formulae and the qualities
   which made its production and its definition possible – precedes its
   existence. The presence of such-and-such a paper-knife or book is thus
   determined before my eyes. Here, then, we are viewing the world from a
   technical standpoint, and we can say that production precedes
   existence.

   When we think of God as the creator, we are thinking of him, most of
   the time, as a supernal artisan. Whatever doctrine we may be
   considering, whether it be a doctrine like that of Descartes, or of
   Leibnitz himself, we always imply that the will follows, more or less,
   from the understanding or at least accompanies it, so that when God
   creates he knows precisely what he is creating. Thus, the conception of
   man in the mind of God is comparable to that of the paper-knife in the
   mind of the artisan: God makes man according to a procedure and a
   conception, exactly as the artisan manufactures a paper-knife,
   following a definition and a formula. Thus each individual man is the
   realisation of a certain conception which dwells in the divine
   understanding. In the philosophic atheism of the eighteenth century,
   the notion of God is suppressed, but not, for all that, the idea that
   essence is prior to existence; something of that idea we still find
   everywhere, in Diderot, in Voltaire and even in Kant. Man possesses a
   human nature; that “human nature,” which is the conception of human
   being, is found in every man; which means that each man is a particular
   example of a universal conception, the conception of Man. In Kant, this
   universality goes so far that the wild man of the woods, man in the
   state of nature and the bourgeois are all contained in the same
   definition and have the same fundamental qualities. Here again, the
   essence of man precedes that historic existence which we confront in
   experience.