This may enable us to understand what is meant by such terms – perhaps
   a little grandiloquent – as anguish, abandonment and despair. As you
   will soon see, it is very simple. First, what do we mean by anguish? –
   The existentialist frankly states that man is in anguish. His meaning
   is as follows: When a man commits himself to anything, fully realising
   that he is not only choosing what he will be, but is thereby at the
   same time a legislator deciding for the whole of mankind – in such a
   moment a man cannot escape from the sense of complete and profound
   responsibility. There are many, indeed, who show no such anxiety. But
   we affirm that they are merely disguising their anguish or are in
   flight from it. Certainly, many people think that in what they are
   doing they commit no one but themselves to anything: and if you ask
   them, “What would happen if everyone did so?” they shrug their
   shoulders and reply, “Everyone does not do so.” But in truth, one ought
   always to ask oneself what would happen if everyone did as one is
   doing; nor can one escape from that disturbing thought except by a kind
   of self-deception. The man who lies in self-excuse, by saying “Everyone
   will not do it” must be ill at ease in his conscience, for the act of
   lying implies the universal value which it denies. By its very disguise
   his anguish reveals itself. This is the anguish that Kierkegaard called
   “the anguish of Abraham.” You know the story: An angel commanded
   Abraham to sacrifice his son; and obedience was obligatory, if it
   really was an angel who had appeared and said, “Thou, Abraham, shalt
   sacrifice thy son.” But anyone in such a case would wonder, first,
   whether it was indeed an angel and secondly, whether I am really
   Abraham. Where are the proofs? A certain mad woman who suffered from
   hallucinations said that people were telephoning to her, and giving her
   orders. The doctor asked, “But who is it that speaks to you?” She
   replied: “He says it is God.” And what, indeed, could prove to her that
   it was God? If an angel appears to me, what is the proof that it is an
   angel; or, if I hear voices, who can prove that they proceed from
   heaven and not from hell, or from my own subconsciousness or some
   pathological condition? Who can prove that they are really addressed to
   me?

   Who, then, can prove that I am the proper person to impose, by my own
   choice, my conception of man upon mankind? I shall never find any proof
   whatever; there will be no sign to convince me of it. If a voice speaks
   to me, it is still I myself who must decide whether the voice is or is
   not that of an angel. If I regard a certain course of action as good,
   it is only I who choose to say that it is good and not bad. There is
   nothing to show that I am Abraham: nevertheless I also am obliged at
   every instant to perform actions which are examples. Everything happens
   to every man as though the whole human race had its eyes fixed upon
   what he is doing and regulated its conduct accordingly. So every man
   ought to say, “Am I really a man who has the right to act in such a
   manner that humanity regulates itself by what I do.” If a man does not
   say that, he is dissembling his anguish. Clearly, the anguish with
   which we are concerned here is not one that could lead to quietism or
   inaction. It is anguish pure and simple, of the kind well known to all
   those who have borne responsibilities. When, for instance, a military
   leader takes upon himself the responsibility for an attack and sends a
   number of men to their death, he chooses to do it and at bottom he
   alone chooses. No doubt under a higher command, but its orders, which
   are more general, require interpretation by him and upon that
   interpretation depends the life of ten, fourteen or twenty men. In
   making the decision, he cannot but feel a certain anguish. All leaders
   know that anguish. It does not prevent their acting, on the contrary it
   is the very condition of their action, for the action presupposes that
   there is a plurality of possibilities, and in choosing one of these,
   they realize that it has value only because it is chosen. Now it is
   anguish of that kind which existentialism describes, and moreover, as
   we shall see, makes explicit through direct responsibility towards
   other men who are concerned. Far from being a screen which could
   separate us from action, it is a condition of action itself.

   And when we speak of “abandonment” – a favorite word of Heidegger – we
   only mean to say that God does not exist, and that it is necessary to
   draw the consequences of his absence right to the end. The
   existentialist is strongly opposed to a certain type of secular
   moralism which seeks to suppress God at the least possible expense.
   Towards 1880, when the French professors endeavoured to formulate a
   secular morality, they said something like this: God is a useless and
   costly hypothesis, so we will do without it. However, if we are to have
   morality, a society and a law-abiding world, it is essential that
   certain values should be taken seriously; they must have an a priori
   existence ascribed to them. It must be considered obligatory a priori
   to be honest, not to lie, not to beat one’s wife, to bring up children
   and so forth; so we are going to do a little work on this subject,
   which will enable us to show that these values exist all the same,
   inscribed in an intelligible heaven although, of course, there is no
   God. In other words – and this is, I believe, the purport of all that
   we in France call radicalism – nothing will be changed if God does not
   exist; we shall rediscover the same norms of honesty, progress and
   humanity, and we shall have disposed of God as an out-of-date
   hypothesis which will die away quietly of itself. The existentialist,
   on the contrary, finds it extremely embarrassing that God does not
   exist, for there disappears with Him all possibility of finding values
   in an intelligible heaven. There can no longer be any good a priori,
   since there is no infinite and perfect consciousness to think it. It is
   nowhere written that “the good” exists, that one must be honest or must
   not lie, since we are now upon the plane where there are only men.
   Dostoevsky once wrote: “If God did not exist, everything would be
   permitted”; and that, for existentialism, is the starting point.
   Everything is indeed permitted if God does not exist, and man is in
   consequence forlorn, for he cannot find anything to depend upon either
   within or outside himself. He discovers forthwith, that he is without
   excuse. For if indeed existence precedes essence, one will never be
   able to explain one’s action by reference to a given and specific human
   nature; in other words, there is no determinism – man is free, man is
   freedom. Nor, on the other hand, if God does not exist, are we provided
   with any values or commands that could legitimise our behaviour. Thus
   we have neither behind us, nor before us in a luminous realm of values,
   any means of justification or excuse. – We are left alone, without
   excuse. That is what I mean when I say that man is condemned to be
   free. Condemned, because he did not create himself, yet is nevertheless
   at liberty, and from the moment that he is thrown into this world he is
   responsible for everything he does. The existentialist does not believe
   in the power of passion. He will never regard a grand passion as a
   destructive torrent upon which a man is swept into certain actions as
   by fate, and which, therefore, is an excuse for them. He thinks that
   man is responsible for his passion. Neither will an existentialist
   think that a man can find help through some sign being vouchsafed upon
   earth for his orientation: for he thinks that the man himself
   interprets the sign as he chooses. He thinks that every man, without
   any support or help whatever, is condemned at every instant to invent
   man. As Ponge has written in a very fine article, “Man is the future of
   man.” That is exactly true. Only, if one took this to mean that the
   future is laid up in Heaven, that God knows what it is, it would be
   false, for then it would no longer even be a future. If, however, it
   means that, whatever man may now appear to be, there is a future to be
   fashioned, a virgin future that awaits him – then it is a true saying.
   But in the present one is forsaken.

   As an example by which you may the better understand this state of
   abandonment, I will refer to the case of a pupil of mine, who sought me
   out in the following circumstances. His father was quarrelling with his
   mother and was also inclined to be a “collaborator”; his elder brother
   had been killed in the German offensive of 1940 and this young man,
   with a sentiment somewhat primitive but generous, burned to avenge him.
   His mother was living alone with him, deeply afflicted by the
   semi-treason of his father and by the death of her eldest son, and her
   one consolation was in this young man. But he, at this moment, had the
   choice between going to England to join the Free French Forces or of
   staying near his mother and helping her to live. He fully realised that
   this woman lived only for him and that his disappearance – or perhaps
   his death – would plunge her into despair. He also realised that,
   concretely and in fact, every action he performed on his mother’s
   behalf would be sure of effect in the sense of aiding her to live,
   whereas anything he did in order to go and fight would be an ambiguous
   action which might vanish like water into sand and serve no purpose.
   For instance, to set out for England he would have to wait indefinitely
   in a Spanish camp on the way through Spain; or, on arriving in England
   or in Algiers he might be put into an office to fill up forms.
   Consequently, he found himself confronted by two very different modes
   of action; the one concrete, immediate, but directed towards only one
   individual; and the other an action addressed to an end infinitely
   greater, a national collectivity, but for that very reason ambiguous –
   and it might be frustrated on the way. At the same time, he was
   hesitating between two kinds of morality; on the one side the morality
   of sympathy, of personal devotion and, on the other side, a morality of
   wider scope but of more debatable validity. He had to choose between
   those two. What could help him to choose? Could the Christian doctrine?
   No. Christian doctrine says: Act with charity, love your neighbour,
   deny yourself for others, choose the way which is hardest, and so
   forth. But which is the harder road? To whom does one owe the more
   brotherly love, the patriot or the mother? Which is the more useful
   aim, the general one of fighting in and for the whole community, or the
   precise aim of helping one particular person to live? Who can give an
   answer to that a priori? No one. Nor is it given in any ethical
   scripture. The Kantian ethic says, Never regard another as a means, but
   always as an end. Very well; if I remain with my mother, I shall be
   regarding her as the end and not as a means: but by the same token I am
   in danger of treating as means those who are fighting on my behalf; and
   the converse is also true, that if I go to the aid of the combatants I
   shall be treating them as the end at the risk of treating my mother as
   a means. If values are uncertain, if they are still too abstract to
   determine the particular, concrete case under consideration, nothing
   remains but to trust in our instincts. That is what this young man
   tried to do; and when I saw him he said, “In the end, it is feeling
   that counts; the direction in which it is really pushing me is the one
   I ought to choose. If I feel that I love my mother enough to sacrifice
   everything else for her – my will to be avenged, all my longings for
   action and adventure then I stay with her. If, on the contrary, I feel
   that my love for her is not enough, I go.” But how does one estimate
   the strength of a feeling? The value of his feeling for his mother was
   determined precisely by the fact that he was standing by her. I may say
   that I love a certain friend enough to sacrifice such or such a sum of
   money for him, but I cannot prove that unless I have done it. I may
   say, “I love my mother enough to remain with her,” if actually I have
   remained with her. I can only estimate the strength of this affection
   if I have performed an action by which it is defined and ratified. But
   if I then appeal to this affection to justify my action, I find myself
   drawn into a vicious circle.

   Moreover, as Gide has very well said, a sentiment which is play-acting
   and one which is vital are two things that are hardly distinguishable
   one from another. To decide that I love my mother by staying beside
   her, and to play a comedy the upshot of which is that I do so – these
   are nearly the same thing. In other words, feeling is formed by the
   deeds that one does; therefore I cannot consult it as a guide to
   action. And that is to say that I can neither seek within myself for an
   authentic impulse to action, nor can I expect, from some ethic,
   formulae that will enable me to act. You may say that the youth did, at
   least, go to a professor to ask for advice. But if you seek counsel –
   from a priest, for example you have selected that priest; and at bottom
   you already knew, more or less, what he would advise. In other words,
   to choose an adviser is nevertheless to commit oneself by that choice.
   If you are a Christian, you will say, consult a priest; but there are
   collaborationists, priests who are resisters and priests who wait for
   the tide to turn: which will you choose? Had this young man chosen a
   priest of the resistance, or one of the collaboration, he would have
   decided beforehand the kind of advice he was to receive. Similarly, in
   coming to me, he knew what advice I should give him, and I had but one
   reply to make. You are free, therefore choose, that is to say, invent.
   No rule of general morality can show you what you ought to do: no signs
   are vouchsafed in this world. The Catholics will reply, “Oh, but they
   are!” Very well; still, it is I myself, in every case, who have to
   interpret the signs. While I was imprisoned, I made the acquaintance of
   a somewhat remarkable man, a Jesuit, who had become a member of that
   order in the following manner. In his life he had suffered a succession
   of rather severe setbacks. His father had died when he was a child,
   leaving him in poverty, and he had been awarded a free scholarship in a
   religious institution, where he had been made continually to feel that
   he was accepted for charity’s sake, and, in consequence, he had been
   denied several of those distinctions and honours which gratify
   children. Later, about the age of eighteen, he came to grief in a
   sentimental affair; and finally, at twenty-two – this was a trifle in
   itself, but it was the last drop that overflowed his cup – he failed in
   his military examination. This young man, then, could regard himself as
   a total failure: it was a sign – but a sign of what? He might have
   taken refuge in bitterness or despair. But he took it – very cleverly
   for him – as a sign that he was not intended for secular success, and
   that only the attainments of religion, those of sanctity and of faith,
   were accessible to him. He interpreted his record as a message from
   God, and became a member of the Order. Who can doubt but that this
   decision as to the meaning of the sign was his, and his alone? One
   could have drawn quite different conclusions from such a series of
   reverses – as, for example, that he had better become a carpenter or a
   revolutionary. For the decipherment of the sign, however, he bears the
   entire responsibility. That is what “abandonment” implies, that we
   ourselves decide our being. And with this abandonment goes anguish.

   As for “despair,” the meaning of this expression is extremely simple.
   It merely means that we limit ourselves to a reliance upon that which
   is within our wills, or within the sum of the probabilities which
   render our action feasible. Whenever one wills anything, there are
   always these elements of probability. If I am counting upon a visit
   from a friend, who may be coming by train or by tram, I presuppose that
   the train will arrive at the appointed time, or that the tram will not
   be derailed. I remain in the realm of possibilities; but one does not
   rely upon any possibilities beyond those that are strictly concerned in
   one’s action. Beyond the point at which the possibilities under
   consideration cease to affect my action, I ought to disinterest myself.
   For there is no God and no prevenient design, which can adapt the world
   and all its possibilities to my will. When Descartes said, “Conquer
   yourself rather than the world,” what he meant was, at bottom, the same
   – that we should act without hope.

   Marxists, to whom I have said this, have answered: “Your action is
   limited, obviously, by your death; but you can rely upon the help of
   others. That is, you can count both upon what the others are doing to
   help you elsewhere, as in China and in Russia, and upon what they will
   do later, after your death, to take up your action and carry it forward
   to its final accomplishment which will be the revolution. Moreover you
   must rely upon this; not to do so is immoral.” To this I rejoin, first,
   that I shall always count upon my comrades-in-arms in the struggle, in
   so far as they are committed, as I am, to a definite, common cause; and
   in the unity of a party or a group which I can more or less control –
   that is, in which I am enrolled as a militant and whose movements at
   every moment are known to me. In that respect, to rely upon the unity
   and the will of the party is exactly like my reckoning that the train
   will run to time or that the tram will not be derailed. But I cannot
   count upon men whom I do not know, I cannot base my confidence upon
   human goodness or upon man’s interest in the good of society, seeing
   that man is free and that there is no human nature which I can take as
   foundational. I do not know where the Russian revolution will lead. I
   can admire it and take it as an example in so far as it is evident,
   today, that the proletariat plays a part in Russia which it has
   attained in no other nation. But I cannot affirm that this will
   necessarily lead to the triumph of the proletariat: I must confine
   myself to what I can see. Nor can I be sure that comrades-in-arms will
   take up my work after my death and carry it to the maximum perfection,
   seeing that those men are free agents and will freely decide, tomorrow,
   what man is then to be. Tomorrow, after my death, some men may decide
   to establish Fascism, and the others may be so cowardly or so slack as
   to let them do so. If so, Fascism will then be the truth of man, and so
   much the worse for us. In reality, things will be such as men have
   decided they shall be. Does that mean that I should abandon myself to
   quietism? No. First I ought to commit myself and then act my
   commitment, according to the time-honoured formula that “one need not
   hope in order to undertake one’s work.” Nor does this mean that I
   should not belong to a party, but only that I should be without
   illusion and that I should do what I can. For instance, if I ask myself
   “Will the social ideal as such, ever become a reality?” I cannot tell,
   I only know that whatever may be in my power to make it so, I shall do;
   beyond that, I can count upon nothing.