The third objection, stated by saying, “You take with one hand what you
   give with the other,” means, at bottom, “your values are not serious,
   since you choose them yourselves.” To that I can only say that I am
   very sorry that it should be so; but if I have excluded God the Father,
   there must be somebody to invent values. We have to take things as they
   are. And moreover, to say that we invent values means neither more nor
   less than this; that there is no sense in life a priori. Life is
   nothing until it is lived; but it is yours to make sense of, and the
   value of it is nothing else but the sense that you choose. Therefore,
   you can see that there is a possibility of creating a human community.
   I have been reproached for suggesting that existentialism is a form of
   humanism: people have said to me, “But you have written in your Nausée
   that the humanists are wrong, you have even ridiculed a certain type of
   humanism, why do you now go back upon that?” In reality, the word
   humanism has two very different meanings. One may understand by
   humanism a theory which upholds man as the end-in-itself and as the
   supreme value. Humanism in this sense appears, for instance, in
   Cocteau’s story Round the World in 80 Hours, in which one of the
   characters declares, because he is flying over mountains in an
   airplane, “Man is magnificent!” This signifies that although I
   personally have not built aeroplanes, I have the benefit of those
   particular inventions and that I personally, being a man, can consider
   myself responsible for, and honoured by, achievements that are peculiar
   to some men. It is to assume that we can ascribe value to man according
   to the most distinguished deeds of certain men. That kind of humanism
   is absurd, for only the dog or the horse would be in a position to
   pronounce a general judgment upon man and declare that he is
   magnificent, which they have never been such fools as to do – at least,
   not as far as I know. But neither is it admissible that a man should
   pronounce judgment upon Man. Existentialism dispenses with any judgment
   of this sort: an existentialist will never take man as the end, since
   man is still to be determined. And we have no right to believe that
   humanity is something to which we could set up a cult, after the manner
   of Auguste Comte. The cult of humanity ends in Comtian humanism,
   shut-in upon itself, and – this must be said – in Fascism. We do not
   want a humanism like that.

   But there is another sense of the word, of which the fundamental
   meaning is this: Man is all the time outside of himself: it is in
   projecting and losing himself beyond himself that he makes man to
   exist; and, on the other hand, it is by pursuing transcendent aims that
   he himself is able to exist. Since man is thus self-surpassing, and can
   grasp objects only in relation to his self-surpassing, he is himself
   the heart and center of his transcendence. There is no other universe
   except the human universe, the universe of human subjectivity. This
   relation of transcendence as constitutive of man (not in the sense that
   God is transcendent, but in the sense of self-surpassing) with
   subjectivity (in such a sense that man is not shut up in himself but
   forever present in a human universe) – it is this that we call
   existential humanism. This is humanism, because we remind man that
   there is no legislator but himself; that he himself, thus abandoned,
   must decide for himself; also because we show that it is not by turning
   back upon himself, but always by seeking, beyond himself, an aim which
   is one of liberation or of some particular realisation, that man can
   realize himself as truly human.