Existence Precedes Essence

The central proposition of existentialism is that existence precedes essence. This means that man first of all exists, encounters himself, surges up in the world – and defines himself afterwards. If man as the existentialist sees him is not definable, it is because to begin with he is nothing. He will not be anything until later, and then he will be what he makes of himself. Thus, there is no human nature, because there is no God to have a conception of it. Man simply is. Not that he is simply what he conceives himself to be, but he is what he wills, and as he conceives himself after already existing – as he wills to be after that leap towards existence. Man is nothing else but that which he makes of himself.

Freedom and Responsibility

Man is condemned to be free; because once thrown into the world, he is responsible for everything he does. It is up to you to give life a meaning. We are left alone, without excuse. That is what I mean when I say that man is condemned to be free. Condemned, because he did not create himself, yet is nevertheless at liberty, and from the moment that he is thrown into this world he is responsible for everything he does.

Bad Faith

Bad faith (mauvaise foi) is a lie to oneself. To be in bad faith is to deny one's freedom or to regard oneself as an object (an "in-itself") rather than a free consciousness (a "for-itself"). A waiter in a cafe acts the part of a waiter; he moves with a certain speed, he balances his tray with a certain solicitude. He is playing at being a waiter. But he knows he is not just a waiter; he is a free subject who has chosen to be a waiter. To pretend that he "is" a waiter in the same way a rock "is" a rock is bad faith. We deceive ourselves into thinking we do not have a choice, when in fact we always do. Even not choosing is a choice.

The Look (Le Regard)

When I am alone, I am the center of my universe. But when another person looks at me, I become an object in their world. I am no longer the master of the situation; I am being judged, categorized, and defined by the Other. This conflict is fundamental to human relationships. The gaze of the Other steals my world and objectifies me. This is why conflict is the original meaning of being-for-others.
