The world is my representation.
The will is the thing-in-itself, the inner content, the essence of the world.
Life swings like a pendulum backward and forward between pain and boredom.
Every man takes the limits of his own field of vision for the limits of the world.
Compassion is the basis of morality.
Money is human happiness in the abstract; he, then, who is no longer capable of enjoying human happiness in the concrete devotes his heart entirely to money.
It is difficult to find happiness within oneself, but it is impossible to find it anywhere else.
The two enemies of human happiness are pain and boredom.
Mostly it is loss which teaches us about the worth of things.
A man can be himself only so long as he is alone; and if he does not love solitude, he will not love freedom; for it is only when he is alone that he is really free.
All truth passes through three stages. First, it is ridiculed. Second, it is violently opposed. Third, it is accepted as being self-evident.
Talent hits a target no one else can hit; Genius hits a target no one else can see.
Reading is thinking with some one else's head instead of one's own.
The shortness of life, so often lamented, may be the best thing about it.
We forfeit three-fourths of ourselves in order to be like other people.
Health is not everything, but without health, everything is nothing.
He who writes for fools is always sure of a large audience.
Hope is the confusion of the desire for a thing with its probability.
To be a philosopher is to have a keen sense of the wonder of the world.
Music is the melody whose text is the world.
Religion is the masterpiece of the art of animal training, for it trains people as to how they shall think.
Great men are like eagles, and build their nest on some lofty solitude.
Opinion is like a pendulum and obeys the same law. If it goes past the centre of gravity on one side, it must go a like distance on the other; and it is only after a certain time that it finds the true point at which it can remain at rest.
Politeness is to human nature what warmth is to wax.
Will without intellect is blind, but intellect without will is powerless.
Treat a work of art like a prince: let it speak to you first.
Change alone is eternal, perpetual, immortal.
The more intelligible and obvious a truth is, the more it needs to be repeated, for the human mind is lazy.
Vulgarity is, at bottom, the kind of will in which the intellect is entirely subservient to the will.
Each day is a little life: every waking and rising a little birth, every fresh morning a little youth, every going to rest and sleep a little death.
It is a clear gain to sacrifice pleasure in order to avoid pain.
The greatest wisdom is to make the enjoyment of the present the supreme object of life.
Whatever you are, be that: and whatever you do, do that.
To become a philosopher, one must first be a little bit mad.
The wise man seeks not pleasure, but freedom from care and pain.
A high degree of intellect tends to make a man unsocial.
Philosophy is a high road; but it is one which few people take.
When we read, another person thinks for us: we merely repeat his mental process.
Buying books would be a good thing if one could also buy the time to read them in: but as a rule the purchase of books is mistaken for the appropriation of their contents.
There is no doubt that life is given us, not to be enjoyed, but to be overcome; to be got over.
Marrying means to halve your rights and double your duties.
Wait for the man who will do the thing you said could not be done.
The universe is a dream dreamed by a single dreamer where all the dream characters dream too.
Sleep is the interest we have to pay on the capital which is called death; and the higher the rate of interest and the more regularly it is paid, the further the date of redemption is postponed.
We seldom think of what we have, but always of what we lack.
Therefore, the first rule of life is to maintain a cheerful disposition.
Hatred is an affair of the heart; contempt that of the head.
Ordinary people merely think how they shall spend their time; a man of talent tries to use it.
Fate shuffles the cards and we play.
Man can do what he wills but he cannot will what he wills.
The person who writes for fools is always sure of a large audience.
Every parting gives a foretaste of death, every reunion a hint of the resurrection.
Whatever occurs, occurs by necessity.
A sense of humour is the only divine quality of man.
Without books the development of civilization would have been impossible.
The physician sees all the weakness of mankind; the lawyer all the wickedness, the theologian all the stupidity.
Wealth is like sea-water; the more we drink, the thirstier we become; and the same is true of fame.
There is no absurdity so palpable but that it may be firmly planted in the human head if you only begin to inculcate it before the age of five, by constantly repeating it with an air of great solemnity.
Life is a constant process of dying.
No rose without a thorn but many a thorn without a rose.
We are like lambs playing in the field, while the butcher eyes them and selects one and then another; for in our good days we do not know what calamity fate has in store for us—disease, persecution, impoverishment, mutilation, loss of sight, madness, death, and so on.
The world is a hell, and men are both the tormented souls and the devils in it.
If children were brought into the world by an act of pure reason alone, would the human race continue to exist? Would not a man rather have so much sympathy with the coming generation as to spare it the burden of existence, or at any rate not take it upon himself to impose that burden upon it in cold blood?
Only the present is true and actual; the past is no longer, the future is not yet.
Suffering by nature or chance never seems so painful as suffering inflicted on us by the arbitrary will of another.
It is with trifles that a man shows his true character.
The safest way of not being very miserable is not to expect to be very happy.
Everyone takes the limits of his own vision for the limits of the world.
Because people have no thoughts to deal with, they deal with cards, and try and win one another's money. Idiots!
Intellect is a magnitude of intensity, not a magnitude of extension.
Just remember, once you’re over the hill you begin to pick up speed.
What a man is contributes much more to his happiness than what he has or how he is regarded by others.
Honour has not to be won; it must only not be lost.
A man’s face as a rule says more, and more interesting things, than his mouth, for it is a compendium of everything his mouth will ever say, in that it is the monogram of all his thoughts and aspirations.
Wicked thoughts and worthless efforts gradually set their mark on the face, especially the eyes.
From the point of view of youth, life is an endless future; from the point of view of old age, it is a very short past.
Before you declare yourself to anyone, look at his face; it is a good plan to know the answer before you ask the question.
Journalists are like dogs, when ever anything moves they begin to bark.
Patriotism is the passion of fools and the most foolish of passions.
Religion is the metaphysics of the masses.
Every miserable fool who has nothing at all of which he can be proud, adopts as a last resource pride in the nation to which he belongs; he is ready and happy to defend all its faults and follies tooth and nail, thus reimbursing himself for his own inferiority.
The art of not reading is a very important one.
The more one has in oneself, the less one needs others.
Solitude is the fate of all great minds.
A man can be himself only so long as he is alone.
Sociability belongs to the most dangerous, even fatal, inclinations.
We forfeit three-fourths of ourselves in order to be like other people.
To be alone is the fate of all great minds.
You must have been warned against letting your hours of leisure pass by without being turned to account.
A man who has no mental needs, because his intellect is of the narrow and normal amount, is, in the strict sense of the word, a Philistine.
The high-minded man must care more for the truth than for what people think.
Most men are not merely the victims of the will to live, but are the dupes of the will to live.
We are all fellow-sufferers in the hospital of life.
To live alone is the fate of all great souls.
Pain is the positive element of existence; pleasure is the negative element, being the cessation of pain.
Every human life is tossed backward and forward between pain and boredom.
The vanity of existence is revealed in the whole form existence assumes: in the infinitude of time and space contrasted with the finite nature of the individual; in the fleeting present as the only form in which actuality exists; in the contingency and relativity of all things; in continual becoming without being; in continual desire without satisfaction; in the continual frustration of striving of which life consists.
Life is a business that does not cover the costs.
The genitals are the focus of the will.
The world is a place of penance.
Death is the true inspiring genius, or the muse of philosophy.
If we were not all so interested in ourselves, life would be so uninteresting that none of us would be able to endure it.
Every individual is a special mistake, whose birth triggers a debt that must be paid by death.
The life of every individual, if we survey it as a whole and in general, and only lay stress upon its most significant features, is really always a tragedy, but gone through in detail, it has the character of a comedy.
Human life must be some kind of mistake.
The greatest of follies is to sacrifice health for any other kind of happiness.
Sleep is a short death, death a long sleep.
To desire immortality is to desire the eternal perpetuation of a great mistake.
Our life is a loan received from death with sleep as the daily interest on this loan.
The closing years of life are like the end of a masquerade party, when the masks are dropped.
After your death you will be what you were before your birth.
Life is a struggle for existence with the certainty of defeat.
Consciousness is the mere surface of our minds, of which, as of the earth, we do not know the inside but only the crust.
The will is the strong blind man who carries on his shoulders the lame man who can see.
The intellect is a mere tool of the will.
Reason is feminine in nature; it can only give after it has received.
The fundamental defect of the female character is that it has no sense of justice.
Women are directly fitted for acting as the nurses and teachers of our early childhood by the fact that they are themselves childish, frivolous and short-sighted; in a word, they are big children all their life long.
(Note: Schopenhauer's views on women are controversial and reflect his time and personal bias, included for historical accuracy of his "personality" database).
Schopenhauer's pessimism is not a denial of value, but a re-evaluation of it.
The denial of the will-to-live is the only way to salvation.
Asceticism is the denial of the will-to-live.
Art is the objectification of the will.
The aesthetic experience is the temporary silencing of the will.
Tragedy is the highest form of poetic art.
Music is the immediate copy of the will itself.
The world as representation is the world as it appears to us.
The world as will is the world as it is in itself.
Time, space, and causality are the forms of our knowledge, not the properties of things in themselves.
The principle of sufficient reason is the basis of all scientific knowledge.
The fourfold root of the principle of sufficient reason.
On the Freedom of the Will.
On the Basis of Morality.
The Two Fundamental Problems of Ethics.
Schopenhauer influenced Nietzsche, Wittgenstein, Freud, and Wagner.
He was influenced by Plato, Kant, and the Upanishads.
"Tat tvam asi" (Thou art that) - the recognition of the identity of one's own self with the ultimate reality.
Compassion is the breakthrough of the metaphysical truth that we are all one.
Egoism is the error of individuation (principium individuationis).
The veil of Maya.
The world is a penal colony.
We are all incarcerated in our own bodies.
The body is the objectification of the will.
Every movement of the will is also a movement of the body.
The brain is the objectification of the intellect.
The stomach is the objectification of the hunger.
The genitals are the objectification of the sexual impulse.
The sexual impulse is the most powerful manifestation of the will-to-live.
Love is a deception practiced by nature to ensure the propagation of the species.
The metaphysics of sexual love.
The species has a prior claim to the individual.
The individual is a means to the ends of the species.
The unshakeable conviction that we are immortal.
The indestructible nature of our true being.
Death is the awakening from the dream of life.
The fear of death is the fear of the destruction of the individual, which is an illusion.
Suicide is not a denial of the will-to-live, but a strong assertion of it; the suicide desires life, but is dissatisfied with the conditions under which it is offered to him.
The only true freedom is the denial of the will.
The saint is the one who has quieted the will.
The philosopher is the one who has understood the will.
The artist is the one who has temporarily escaped the will.
The genius is the one who has a surplus of intellect over will.
Madness is the disruption of the thread of memory.
History is the endless repetition of the same thing.
Progress is an illusion.
Optimism is a wicked way of thinking, a bitter mockery of the unspeakable suffering of humanity.
The best of all possible worlds? This is the worst of all possible worlds!
If the world were a little worse, it could not exist.
The happiness of a given life is not to be measured by its joys and pleasures, but by the absence of suffering.
The less one feels the burden of life, the happier one is.
Boredom is the proof that existence is in itself valueless.
If life were valuable in itself, boredom would not exist.
We are like the shipwrecked who struggle with the waves, only to be swallowed up by them in the end.
The life of the animal is a continuous present.
The life of man is a continuous past and future.
Reason is the faculty of abstract concepts.
Concepts are the husks of things, not the kernels.
Intuition is the source of all true knowledge.
Philosophy must start from the subject, not the object.
The world exists only for the subject.
"The World as Will and Representation" begins with the sentence: "The world is my representation."
This is a truth which holds good for everything that lives and knows.
The subject is that which knows all things and is known by none.
The subject is the supporter of the world.
If the subject were removed, the world would vanish.
The object is conditioned by the subject.
The subject is conditioned by the object? No, the subject is the condition of the existence of the object.
Materialism is the philosophy of the subject who forgets himself.
Idealism is the only true philosophy.
But idealism must be completed by the metaphysics of the will.
The will is the only thing that is not a representation.
The will is the only thing that is real.
Everything else is appearance.
The phenomenal world is the mirror of the will.
The will is one and indivisible.
It is present whole and undivided in every stone, every plant, every animal, every man.
The grades of the objectification of the will.
The ideas are the eternal forms of the will.
The struggle of the will with itself.
Nature is a battleground.
The will feeds on itself.
The will is a hungry beast.
The will is a demon.
We are the puppets of the will.
But we can cut the strings.
Through aesthetic contemplation and asceticism.
The denial of the will is the only path to peace.
Nirvana.
Nothingness.
To those in whom the will has turned and denied itself, this our world, which is so real, with all its suns and milky ways—is nothing.
