The world is my representation: this is a truth valid with reference to every living and knowing being, although man alone can bring it into reflective, abstract consciousness. If he really does this, he has philosophical discretion. It then becomes clear and certain to him that he does not know a sun and an earth, but only an eye that sees a sun, a hand that feels an earth; that the world around him is there only as representation, in other words, only in reference to another thing, the consciousness, which is himself.

The will is the thing-in-itself, the inner content, the essence of the world. Life, visible world, phenomenon, is only the mirror of the will. Therefore life accompanies the will as inseparably as the shadow accompanies the body; and if will exists, so will life, the world, exist. Life is, therefore, assured to the will to live; and so long as we are filled with the will to live, we need not be apprehensive for our existence, even in the sight of death.

Unless suffering is the direct and immediate object of life, our existence must entirely fail of its aim. It is absurd to look upon the enormous amount of pain that abounds everywhere in the world, and originates in needs and necessities inseparable from life itself, as serving no purpose at all and the result of mere chance. Each separate misfortune, as it comes, seems, no doubt, to be something exceptional; but misfortune in general is the rule.

The life of every individual, if we survey it as a whole and in general, and only lay stress upon its most significant features, is really always a tragedy, but gone through in detail, it has the character of a comedy. For the deeds and vexations of the day, the restless irritation of the moment, the desires and fears of the week, the mishaps of every hour, are all through chance, which is ever bent upon some jest, scenes of a comedy. But the never-satisfied wishes, the frustrated efforts, the hopes unmercifully crushed by fate, the unfortunate errors of the whole life, with increasing suffering and death at the end, are always a tragedy. Thus, as if fate would add derision to the misery of our existence, our life must contain all the woes of tragedy, and yet we cannot even assert the dignity of tragic characters, but in the broad detail of life we must inevitably be the foolish characters of a comedy.

To desire is to suffer; for to desire is to want, and to want is to be in pain. But the satisfaction of a desire brings with it only a momentary cessation of pain; it is a negative pleasure. It is not a positive good, but only the removal of an evil. And no sooner is one desire satisfied than another takes its place. Thus, life is a constant oscillation between pain and boredom.

A man can be himself only so long as he is alone; and if he does not love solitude, he will not love freedom; for it is only when he is alone that he is really free. Constraint is always present in society, like a companion of whom there is no riddance; and in proportion to the greatness of a man’s individuality, it will be hard for him to bear the sacrifices which all intercourse with others demands. Solitude will be welcomed or endured or avoided, according as a man’s personal value is large or small, the wretch feeling his misery, and the great intellect his greatness, in manifold degrees.

Talent hits a target no one else can hit; Genius hits a target no one else can see.

The doctor sees all the weakness of mankind; the lawyer all the wickedness, the theologian all the stupidity.

Mostly it is loss which teaches us about the worth of things.

Every man takes the limits of his own field of vision for the limits of the world.
