"The world is my representation": This is a truth which holds good for everything that lives and knows, though man alone can bring it into reflective and abstract consciousness. If he really does this, he has attained to philosophical wisdom. It then becomes clear and certain to him that what he knows is not a sun and an earth, but only an eye that sees a sun, a hand that feels an earth; that the world which surrounds him is there only as representation, in other words, only in reference to another thing, the consciousness, which is himself. If any truth can be asserted with a priori certainty, it is this: for it is the expression of the most general form of all possible and thinkable experience: a form which is more immediate than time, or space, or causality, for all these presuppose it. While each of these forms, which we have recognized as so many particular modes of the principle of sufficient reason, is valid only for a particular class of representations, the division into object and subject, on the other hand, is the form of all those classes, is that form under which alone any representation of whatever kind it be, abstract or intuitive, pure or empirical, is possible and thinkable. No truth therefore is more certain, more independent of all others, and less in need of proof than this, that everything that exists for knowledge, and hence the whole of this world, is only object in relation to the subject, perception of the perceiver, in a word, representation. This applies to the present as well as to the past and the future, to what is remotest as well as to what is nearest; for it applies to time and space themselves, in which alone these distinctions arise. All that in any way belongs or can belong to the world is inevitably thus conditioned through the subject, and exists only for the subject. The world is representation.

This truth is by no means new. It was in the main the same as that which appeared in the skeptical reflections from which Descartes started. Berkeley, however, was the first to enunciate it distinctively, although the remainder of his philosophy consists only of this, and thus it endures. Kant's principal mistake was the neglect of this principle, as is shown in the appendix. The ancient wisdom of the Indians, on the other hand, says, "It is Maya, the veil of deception, which blinds the eyes of mortals, and makes them behold a world of which they cannot say either that it is or that it is not: for it is like a dream; it is like the sunshine on the sand which the traveller takes for water, or the thrown-down rope which he takes for a snake." (These similes are repeated in numberless passages of the Vedas and Puranas.) That which the Indians meant is nothing else than what we are now speaking of, the world as representation.

In this first book, then, we consider the world only from this side, in so far as it is representation. The inner being, however, which alone is not representation, but which the world represents, is the will. This we shall consider in the second book. But before we go further, we must consider the form of representation itself, the division into subject and object, which is the most general form of all representation.

That which knows all things and is known by none is the subject. Thus it is the supporter of the world, that condition of all phenomena, of all objects which is always presupposed; for all that exists, exists only for the subject. Everyone finds himself to be subject, yet only in so far as he knows, not in so far as he is an object of knowledge. But his body is object, and therefore from this point of view we call it representation. For the body is an object among objects, and is conditioned by the laws of objects, although it is an immediate object. Like all objects of perception, it lies within the universal forms of knowledge, time and space, which are the conditions of multiplicity. The subject, on the contrary, the knower, never the known, does not lie within these forms, but is always presupposed by them; it has therefore neither plurality nor its opposite, unity, but is one and the same, however numerous the knowing beings may be. For each of these is, exactly like every other, the subject, the supporter of the world. The world as representation, then, has two essential, necessary, and inseparable halves. The one half is the object, the forms of which are space and time, and through these plurality. The other half is the subject, which is not in space and time, for it is whole and undivided in every representing being. Hence a single one of these beings with the object completes the world as representation just as fully as the millions that exist. And if that single one were to vanish, then the world as representation would cease to exist.
