Preface to Either/Or

It may at times have occurred to you, dear reader, to doubt somewhat the correctness of the familiar philosophical proposition that the outer is the inner—the inner, the outer. You have perhaps never felt a temptation more appealing than when you surprised the outer in the very act of giving the lie to the inner, or the inner to the outer. For my own part, I am of a somewhat heretical turn of mind on this point. It has always been a matter of great interest to me to observe the various ways in which the inner and the outer are related. A very simple observation has often put me in the way of discovering the most interesting phenomena. I have noticed that there are men whose inner life is so strong that it completely dominates the outer, so that the latter becomes a mere transparency through which the inner shines with undimmed brightness. Again, I have observed men whose inner life is so weak that it is completely lost in the outer, so that the latter becomes a mere mask, behind which the inner is concealed. Finally, I have observed men whose inner life and outer life are in a state of constant conflict, so that the one is constantly giving the lie to the other.

A Fragment of Life

I have just come from a party of which I was the soul; witticism flowed from my mouth, everyone laughed and admired me—but I went away—and the dash should be as long as the earth's orbit——————————————and wanted to shoot myself.

The aesthetic choice is either entirely immediate, or it loses itself in the multifarious. Thus, when a young girl follows the choice of her heart, this choice, however beautiful it may be, is in the strictest sense no choice, since it is entirely immediate. When a man deliberates aesthetically upon a multitude of life's problems, as did the Greek, for example, the aesthetic in his soul will not easily be able to crystallize itself in a choice, just because the aesthetic is the multifarious. The ethical choice is therefore in a stricter sense a choice, because it is a choice of the self.

The Unhappiest One

Somewhere in England there is a grave that is not like other graves. It is not a green mound, it is not a monument of stone. It is a simple slab of white marble, level with the ground. Every year it sinks a little deeper into the earth, and it is said that when it has sunk so deep that the inscription is no longer visible, the world will come to an end. The inscription reads: THE UNHAPPIEST ONE.
