Preface

It may perhaps occur to you, dear reader, that there was a time when you felt a need to distinguish between the external and the internal, a time when you were conscious that the external is not the internal, and the internal not the external, a time when you felt that the external is the internal and the internal the external.

Diapsalmata

What is a poet? An unhappy man who in his heart harbors a deep anguish, but whose lips are so fashioned that the sighs and cries which pass over them are transformed into ravishing music.

I have just now come from a party where I was its life and soul; witticisms streamed from my lips, everyone laughed and admired me—but I went away —yes, the dash should be as long as the radius of the earth’s orbit——————————and wanted to shoot myself.

I do not care for anything. I do not care to ride, for the exercise is too violent. I do not care to walk, for it is too strenuous. I do not care to lie down, for I should remain lying, and I do not care to do that.

The Aesthetic Validity of Marriage

There are two ways. One is to suffer; the other is to become a professor of the fact that another suffered. The first is the way of the genius; the second is the way of the profit-making professor.

The Rotation of Crops

Boredom is the root of all evil. It is very curious that boredom, which itself has such a calm and sedate nature, can have such a capacity to initiate motion. The effect that boredom has is altogether magical, but this effect is one not of attraction but of repulsion.

My Soul is dark and cold, like a winter night when the moon does not shine and the wind blows over the heath.

Either/Or

If you marry, you will regret it; if you do not marry, you will also regret it; if you marry or do not marry, you will regret both; whether you marry or do not marry, you will regret both. Laugh at the world’s follies, you will regret it, weep over them, you will also regret that; laugh at the world’s follies or weep over them, you will regret both; whether you laugh at the world’s follies or weep over them, you will regret both. Believe a woman, you will regret it, believe her not, you will also regret that; believe a woman or believe her not, you will regret both; whether you believe a woman or believe her not, you will regret both. Hang yourself, you will regret it; do not hang yourself, you will also regret that; hang yourself or do not hang yourself, you will regret both; whether you hang yourself or do not hang yourself, you will regret both. This, gentlemen, is the sum and substance of all philosophy.
