The subjective thinker’s form, the form of his communication, is his style. His form must be just as manifold as are the opposites that he holds together. The systematic eins, zwei, drei is an abstract form that also must inevitably run into trouble whenever it is to be applied to the concrete. To the same degree as the subjective thinker is concrete, his form must also be concretely dialectical. But just as he himself is not a poet, not an ethicist, not a dialectician, so also his form is none of these directly. His form must first and foremost be related to his existence, and in this regard he must have at his disposal the poetic, the ethical, the dialectical, the religious. Subordinate to this character of his communication, that it is action, there is the form of the communication, which varies according to whether he is developing a problem aesthetically, ethically, or dialectically, or whether he is expressing his own personal existence in its immediacy, or whether he is speaking as a believer.

What I really lack is to be clear in my mind what I am to do, not what I am to know, except in so far as a certain understanding must precede every action. The thing is to understand myself, to see what God really wishes me to do; the thing is to find a truth which is true for me, to find the idea for which I can live and die. What is the use of discovering so-called objective truth, of working through all the systems of philosophy and of being able, if required, to review them all and show up the inconsistencies within each system; . . . what is the use of being able to formulate the meaning of Christianity so as to be able to explain it to many a fellow human being, if it has no deeper meaning for me and for my life?

People understand me so poorly that they don't even understand my complaint about them not understanding me.

Anxiety is the dizziness of freedom.

Life can only be understood backwards; but it must be lived forwards.

The most common form of despair is not being who you are.

To have faith is precisely to lose one's mind so as to win God.

It is perfectly true, as philosophers say, that life must be understood backwards. But they forget the other proposition, that it must be lived forwards.

People demand freedom of speech as a compensation for the freedom of thought which they seldom use.

There are two ways to be fooled. One is to believe what isn't true; the other is to refuse to believe what is true.

I see it all perfectly; there are two possible situations — one can either do this or that. My honest opinion and my friendly advice is this: do it or do not do it — you will regret both.

If you marry, you will regret it; if you do not marry, you will also regret it; if you marry or do not marry, you will regret both; Laugh at the world’s follies, you will regret it, weep over them, you will also regret that; laugh at the world’s follies or weep over them, you will regret both; whether you laugh at the world’s follies or weep over them, you will regret both. Believe a woman, you will regret it, believe her not, you will also regret that; believe a woman or believe her not, you will regret both; whether you believe a woman or believe her not, you will regret both. Hang yourself, you will regret it; do not hang yourself, you will also regret that; hang yourself or do not hang yourself, you will regret both; whether you hang yourself or do not hang yourself, you will regret both. This, gentlemen, is the quintessence of all the wisdom of life.

The thinker without a paradox is like a lover without passion: a mediocre fellow.

The highest and most beautiful thing is the highest and most beautiful.

It is the duty of the human understanding to understand that there are things which it cannot understand, and what those things are.

The self is a relation that relates itself to itself or is the relation's relating itself to itself in the relation; the self is not the relation but that the relation relates itself to itself. A human being is a synthesis of the infinite and the finite, of the temporal and the eternal, of freedom and necessity, in short, a synthesis. A synthesis is a relation between two. Considered in this way, a human being is still not a self.

Face the facts of being what you are, for that is what changes what you are.

But since I am not a poet, I have only my own life.
