Excerpt from FEAR AND TREMBLING

PREFACE

Not only in the world of commerce but also in the world of ideas our age is putting on a veritable clearance sale. Everything is to be had at such a bargain that it is dubious whether in the end there is anybody who will want to buy. Every speculative price-fixer who conscientiously directs attention to the significant march of modern philosophy, every private dozent, tutor, and student, every crofter and cottager in philosophy, is not content with doubting everything but goes further. Perhaps it would be untimely and ill-timed to ask them where they are going, but surely it is courteous and unobtrusive to take it for granted that they have doubted everything, since otherwise it would be queer of them to be going further. This movement they have all made, and apparently with such ease that they do not think it necessary to let drop a word about the how; for not even he who anxiously and with deep concern sought a little guidance from these veterans, not even he found any.

But in our time nobody is content to stop with faith but goes further. It would perhaps be rash to ask where they are going, but it is surely a sign of breeding and culture for me to assume that everybody has faith, for otherwise it would be queer for them to be going further. In those old days it was different, then faith was a task for a whole lifetime, because it was assumed that dexterity in faith is not acquired in a few days or weeks. When the tried oldster drew near to his last hour, having fought the good fight and kept the faith, his heart was still young enough not to have forgotten that fear and trembling which chastened the youth, which the man indeed held in check, but which no man quite outgrows . . . except as he might succeed in going further as early as the earliest possible point.

...

PRELUDE

Once upon a time there was a man who as a child had heard the beautiful story about how God tempted Abraham, and how he endured temptation, kept the faith, and a second time received again a son contrary to expectation. When he got older he read the same story with even greater admiration, for life had separated what was united in the pious simplicity of the child. The older he got, the more frequently his mind reverted to that story, his enthusiasm became greater and greater, and yet he was less and less able to understand the story. At last in his interest for that he forgot everything else; his soul had only one wish, to see Abraham, one longing, to have been witness to that event. His desire was not to behold the beautiful tapestry of the imagination, but the shudder of thought. He wanted to be present when Abraham lifted up the knife. He visited the scene in the spirit. He wandered towards Mount Moriah. He fell upon his knees.

I.

It was early in the morning, Abraham arose, he saddled his asses, left his tent, and Isaac with him, but Sarah looked out of the window after them until they had gone down the valley and she could see them no more. They rode in silence for three days. On the morning of the fourth day Abraham said never a word, but he lifted up his eyes and saw Mount Moriah afar off. He left his young men behind and went on alone with Isaac, leading him by the hand. But when the fire was kindled and the wood laid in order, and Abraham had bound Isaac his father and had taken the knife, he turned to him and said, "Thou foolish boy, dost thou believe that I am about to do this because God requires it of me? No, I am an idolater, this desire which possesses me is a anxiety of the soul, I want to murder thee, it is my pleasure in this to cure my old age." Then Isaac trembled and cried in his anguish, "God in heaven, have mercy upon me, God of Abraham, have pity upon me, if I have no father upon earth, be Thou my father!" But Abraham said softly to himself, "Lord of Heaven, I thank Thee; after all it is better that he believe I am a monster, rather than that he should lose faith in Thee."

...

PROBLEM I

IS THERE SUCH A THING AS A TELEOLOGICAL SUSPENSION OF THE ETHICAL?

The ethical as such is the universal, it applies to everyone, and the same thing is expressed from another point of view by saying that it applies every instant. It reposes immanently in itself, it has nothing without itself which is its telos, but is itself telos for everything outside it, and when this has been incorporated by the ethical it can go no further. Conceived immediately as physical and psychical, the particular individual is the individual who has his telos in the universal, and his ethical task is to express himself constantly in it, to abolish his particularity in order to become the universal. As soon as the individual would assert himself in his particularity over against the universal he sins, and only by recognizing this can he again reconcile himself with the universal. Every time the individual after he has entered the universal feels an impulse to assert himself as the particular, he is in temptation (Anfechtung), and he can labor himself out of this only by abandoning himself as the particular in the universal. If this be the highest thing that can be said of man and of his existence, then the ethical has the same nature as man's eternal blessedness, which to all eternity and at every instant is his telos, since it would be a contradiction to say that this might be abandoned (i.e. teleologically suspended), seeing that as soon as it is suspended it is forfeited, whereas that other, so it is said, is not forfeited by being suspended but is preserved precisely in that higher thing which is its telos.

If such be the case, then Hegel is right when in his Logic he characterizes this as the Good and the Conscience the Evil (as the particular individual which as a particularity is superior to the universal), but he is wrong in talking about faith, wrong in not protesting loudly and clearly against the fact that Abraham enjoys honor and glory as the father of faith, whereas he ought to be prosecuted and convicted as a murderer.

For faith is this paradox, that the particular is higher than the universal--yet in such a way, be it observed, that the movement repeats itself, and that consequently the individual, after having been in the universal, now as the particular isolates himself as higher than the universal. If this be not faith, then Abraham is lost, then faith has never existed in the world . . . because it has always existed. For if the ethical (i.e. the moral) is the highest thing, and if nothing incommensurable remains in man in any other way but as the evil (i.e. the particular which has to be expressed in the universal), then one needs no other categories than those which the Greek philosophers possessed or which can be deduced from them. This is the eternal truth which the Christian church has held through all ages: that the particular is higher than the universal.
