Preface

Not only in the world of commerce but also in the world of ideas our age is putting on a big clearance sale. Everything can be had so dirt cheap that one begins to wonder whether in the end anyone will want to make a bid. Every speculative monitor who conscientiously signals the important trends in modern philosophy, every assistant professor, tutor, and student, every rural outsider and tenant incumbent in philosophy is unwilling to stop with doubting everything but goes further. Perhaps it would be untimely and ill-timed to ask them where they are going, but it is surely courteous and unobtrusive to take it for granted that they have doubted everything, since otherwise it would be queer for them to be going further. Having performed this preliminary movement, they have all of them doubtless established this as a fact so that they do not need to repeat it, for there are some who think that it is a slight on such men’s skill to assume that it is necessary for them to reiterate the theorem, and there are others who think that they are not obliged to say anything unless they have something new to say, because of the great fertility of their minds.

In our time, nobody is content to stop with faith but wants to go further. It would perhaps be rash to ask where these people are going, but it is surely a sign of breeding and culture for me to assume that everybody has faith, for otherwise it would be queer for them to be going further. In those old days it was different, then faith was a task for a whole lifetime, because it was assumed that dexterity in faith is not acquired in a few days or weeks. When the tried oldster drew near to his last hour, having fought the good fight and kept the faith, his heart was still young enough not to have forgotten that fear and trembling which chastened the youth, which the man indeed held in check, but which no man quite outgrows . . . except as he might succeed at the earliest opportunity in going further. Where these revered figures arrived, that is the point where everybody in our day begins to go further.
