Preface

Not only in the world of commerce but also in the world of ideas our age is putting on a big clearance sale. Everything can be had so dirt cheap that one begins to wonder whether in the end anyone will want to make a bid. Every speculative price-fixer who conscientiously directs attention to the significant march of modern philosophy, every Privatdocent, tutor, and student, every crofter and cottar in philosophy, is not content with doubting everything but goes further. Perhaps it would be untimely and ill-timed to ask them where they are going, but surely it is courteous and not without humble interest to assume that they have doubted everything, since otherwise it would be queer to say that they were going further. This preliminary movement they have therefore all of them made, and presumably with such ease that they do not think it necessary to waste a word about how they did it; for not even he who anxiously and with deep concern sought a little enlightenment in a venerable philosopher's book found there any such guidance, found rather that he did not even sustain his position but, to speak the truth, had vanished.

But in our time, as was said, they do not stop with faith, they go further. It would be rash to ask where they are going, but it is perhaps not too bold to assume that they have faith, since otherwise it would be queer to talk about going further. In the old days it was different, then faith was a task for a whole lifetime, because it was assumed that dexterity in faith is not acquired in a few days or weeks. When the tried oldster drew near to his last hour, having fought the good fight and kept the faith, his heart was still young enough not to have forgotten that fear and trembling which chastened the youth, which the man indeed held in check, but which no man quite outgrows . . . except as he might succeed in going further early on. Where these revered figures arrived, that is the point where everybody in our day begins to go further.

The present writer is by no means a philosopher. He is, poetice et eleganter [in a poetic and refined way], a freelance writer who neither writes the System nor gives promises of the System, who neither subscribes to the System nor ascribes anything to it. He writes because to him it is a luxury that becomes the more agreeable and evident, the fewer there are who buy and read what he writes. He easily foresees his fate in an age when passion has been obliterated in favor of science, in an age when an author who wants to have readers must take care to write in such a way that the book can be easily leafed through during the afternoon nap, and be sure to carry himself like the polite gardener in the advertisement, who with hat in hand stands awaiting the esteemed public's commands.

Problem I: Is there a Teleological Suspension of the Ethical?

The ethical as such is the universal, it applies to everyone, which may be expressed from another point of view by saying that it applies every instant. It rests immanent in itself, has nothing without itself which is its telos, but is itself telos for everything outside it, and when this has been incorporated by the ethical it can go no further. Conceived immediately as physical and psychical, the particular individual is the individual who has his telos in the universal, and his ethical task is to express himself constantly in it, to abolish his particularity in order to become the universal. As soon as the individual would assert himself as the particular over against the universal, he sins, and only by recognizing this can he again reconcile himself with the universal. Every time the individual after he has entered the universal remains inclined to assert himself as the particular, he is in a spiritual trial (Anfechtung), and he can labor himself out of this only by repentantly surrendering himself as the particular in the universal. If this be the highest thing that can be said of man and his existence, then the ethical has the same nature as man's eternal blessedness, which to all eternity and at every instant is his telos, since it would be a contradiction to say that this might be abandoned (i.e. teleologically suspended), seeing that as soon as this is suspended it is forfeited, whereas in other cases what is suspended is not forfeited but is preserved in the higher sphere which is its telos.

If such be the case, then Hegel is right when in his chapter on "The Good and the Conscience," he characterizes man merely as the particular and regards this character as "a moral form of evil" (see especially The Philosophy of Right), which must be annulled in the teleology of the moral, so that the individual who remains in this stage is either sinning or subjected to spiritual trial (Anfechtung). But he is wrong in talking about faith, wrong in not protesting loudly and clearly against the fact that Abraham enjoys honor and glory as the father of faith, whereas he ought to be prosecuted and convicted of murder.

For faith is this paradox, that the particular is higher than the universal--yet in such a way, be it observed, that the movement repeats itself, and that consequently the individual, after having been in the universal, now as the particular isolates himself as higher than the universal. If this be not faith, then Abraham is lost, then faith has never existed in the world . . . because it has always existed. For if the ethical (i.e. the moral) is the highest thing, and if nothing incommensurable remains in man in any other way but as the evil (i.e. the particular which has to be expressed in the universal), then one needs no other categories than those which the Greek philosophers possessed or which can be deduced from them by logic. But the merit of Abraham is precisely that as the particular individual he is higher than the universal. This he becomes, not by virtue of being a universal man, but by virtue of being a particular individual.
