PREPARATION FOR A CHRISTIAN LIFE




I[1]


"COME HITHER UNTO ME, ALL YE THAT LABOR AND ARE
HEAVY LADEN, AND I WILL GIVE YOU REST."
(MATTHEW 11, 28.)




THE INVITATION


"Come hither!"--It is not at all strange if he who is in danger
and needs help--speedy, immediate help, perhaps--it is not strange
if he cries out: "come hither"! Nor it is strange that a quack
cries his wares: "come hither, I cure all maladies"; alas, for
in the case of the quack it is only too true that it is the
physician who has need of the sick. "Come hither all ye who
at extortionate prices can pay for the cure--or at any rate
for the medicine; here is physic for everybody--who can pay;
come hither!"

In all other cases, however, it is generally true that he who
can help must be sought; and, when found, may be difficult of
access; and, if access is had, his help may have to be implored
a long time; and when his help has been implored a long time,
he may be moved only with difficulty, that is, he sets a high
price on his services; and sometimes, precisely when he refuses
payment or generously asks for none, it is only an expression
of how infinitely high he values his services. On the other hand,
he[2] who sacrificed himself, he sacrifices himself, here too;
it is indeed he who seeks those in need of help, is himself the
one who goes about and calls, almost imploringly: "come hither!"
He, the only one who can help, and help with what alone is indispensable,
and can save from the one truly mortal disease, he does not
wait for people to come to him, but comes himself, without having
been called; for it is he who calls out to them, it is he who
holds out help--and what help! Indeed, that simple sage of antiquity[3]
was as infinitely right as the majority who do the opposite are
wrong, in setting no great price, whether on himself or his
instruction; even if he thus in a certain sense proudly expressed
the utter difference in kind between payment and his services.
But he was not so solicitous as to beg any one to come to him,
notwithstanding--or shall I say because?--he was not altogether
sure what his help signified; for the more sure one is that his
help is the only one obtainable, the more reason has he, in a
human sense, to ask a great price for it; and the less sure one
is, the more reason has he to offer freely the possible help
he has, in order to do at least something for others. But he
who calls himself the Savior, and knows that he is, he calls
out solicitously: "come hither unto me!"


"Come hither all ye!"--Strange! For if he who, when it comes
to the point, perhaps cannot help a single one--if such a one
should boastfully invite everybody, that would not seem so
very strange, man's nature being such as it is. But if a man
is absolutely sure of being able to help, and at the same time
willing to help, willing to devote his all in doing so, and with
all sacrifices, then he generally makes at least one reservation;
which is, to make a choice among those he means to help. That
is, however willing one may be, still it is not everybody one
cares to help; one does not care to sacrifice one's self to
that extent. But he, the only one who can really help, and really
help everybody--the only one, therefore, who really can invite
everybody--he makes no conditions whatever; but utters the invitation
which, from the beginning of the world, seems to have been reserved
for him: "Come hither all ye!" Ah, human self-sacrifice, even when
thou art most beautiful and noble, when we admire thee most: this
is a sacrifice still greater, which is, to sacrifice every provision
for one's own self, so that in one's willingness to help there is
not even the least partiality. Ah, the love that sets no price on
one's self, that makes one forget altogether that he is the
helper, and makes one altogether blind as to who it is one helps,
but infinitely careful only that he be a sufferer, whatever else he
may be; and thus willing unconditionally to help everybody--different,
alas! in this from everybody!

"Come hither unto me!" Strange! For human compassion also, and
willingly, does something for them that labor and are heavy laden;
one feeds the hungry, clothes the naked, makes charitable gifts,
builds charitable institutions, and if the compassion be heartfelt,
perhaps even visits those that labor and are heavy laden. But to
invite them to come to one, that will never do, because then all
one's household and manner of living would have to be changed.
For a man cannot himself live in abundance, or at any rate in
well-being and happiness, and at the same time dwell in one and
the same house together with, and in daily intercourse with, the
poor and miserable, with them that labor and are heavy laden! In
order to be able to invite them in such wise, a man must himself
live altogether in the same way, as poor as the poorest, as lowly
as the lowliest, familiar with the sorrows and sufferings of life,
and altogether belonging to the same station as they whom he invites,
that is, they who labor and are heavy laden. If he wishes to
invite a sufferer, he must either change his own condition to be
like that of the sufferer, or else change that of the sufferer to
be like his own; for if this is not done the difference will
stand out only the more by contrast. And if you wish to invite
all those who suffer--for you may make an exception with one of
them and change his condition--it can be done only in one way,
which is, to change your condition so as to live as they do;
provided your life be not already lived thus, as was the case
with Him who said: "Come hither unto me, all ye that labor and
are heavy laden!" Thus said he; and they who lived with him
saw him, and behold! there was not even the least thing in his
manner of life to contradict it. With the silent and truthful
eloquence of actual performance his life expresses--even though
he had never in his life said these words--his life expresses:
"Come hither, unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden"!
He abides by his word, or he himself is the word; he is what he
says, and also in this sense he is the Word.[4]


"All ye that labor and are heavy laden." Strange! His only concern
is lest there be a single one who labors and is heavy laden who
does not hear this invitation. Neither does he fear that too many
will come. Ah, heart-room makes house-room; but where wilt thou
find heart-room, if not in his heart? He leaves it to each one how
to understand his invitation: he has a clear conscience about
it, for he has invited all those that labor and are heavy laden.

But what means it, then, to labor and be heavy laden? Why does
he not offer a clearer explanation so that one may know exactly
whom he means, and why is he so chary of his words? Ah, thou
narrow-minded one, he is so chary of his words, lest he be narrow-minded;
and thou narrow-hearted one, he is so chary of his words lest
he be narrow-hearted. For such is his love--and love has regard
to all--as to prevent any one from troubling and searching his
heart whether he too be among those invited. And he who would
insist on a more definite explanation, is he not likely to be
some self-loving person who is calculating whether this explanation
does not particularly fit himself; one who does not consider that
the more of such exact explanations are offered, the more certainly
some few would be left in doubt as to whether they were invited?
Ah man, why does thine eye see only thyself, why is it evil because
he is good?[5] The invitation to all men opens the arms of him
who invites, and thus he stands of aspect everlasting; but no
sooner is a closer explanation attempted which might help one
or the other to another kind of certainty, than his aspect would
be transformed and, as it were, a shadow of change would pass
over his countenance.

"I will give you rest." Strange! For then the words "come hither
unto me" must be understood to mean: stay with me, I am rest;
or, it is rest to remain with me. It is not, then, as in other
cases where he who helps and says "come hither" must afterwards
say: "now depart again," explaining to each one where the help
he needs is to be found, where the healing herb grows which will
cure him, or where the quiet spot is found where he may rest
from labor, or where the happier continent exists where one is
not heavy laden. But no, he who opens his arms, inviting every
one--ah, if all, all they that labor and are heavy laden came
to him, he would fold them all to his heart, saying: "stay with
me now; for to stay with me is rest." The helper himself is the
help. Ah, strange, he who invites everybody and wishes to help
everybody, his manner of treating the sick is as if calculated
for every sick man, and as if every sick man who comes to him
were his only patient. For otherwise a physician divides his
time among many patients who, however great their number, still
are far, far from being all mankind. He will prescribe the medicine,
he will say what is to be done, and how it is to be used, and
then he will go--to some other patient; or, in case the patient
should visit him, he will let him depart. The physician cannot
remain sitting all day with one patient, and still less can he
have all his patients about him in his home, and yet sit all
day with one patient without neglecting the others. For this
reason the helper and his help are not one and the same thing.
The help which the physician prescribes is kept with him by the
patient all day so that he may constantly use it, whilst the
physician visits him now and again; or he visits the physician
now and again. But if the helper is also the help, why, then
he will stay with the sick man all day, or the sick man with
him--ah, strange that it is just this helper who invites all men!




II


COME HITHER ALL YE THAT LABOR AND ARE HEAVY LADEN,
AND I WILL GIVE YOU REST.


What enormous multiplicity, what an almost boundless diversity,
of people invited; for a man, a lowly man, may, indeed, try to
enumerate only a few of these diversities--but he who invites
must invite all men, even if every one specially and individually.


The invitation goes forth, then--along the highways and the
byways, and along the loneliest paths; aye, goes forth where
there is a path so lonely that one man only, and no one else,
knows of it, and goes forth where there is but one track, the
track of the wretched one who fled along that path with his
misery, that and no other track; goes forth even where there is
no path to show how one may return: even there the invitation
penetrates and by itself easily and surely finds its way back--most
easily, indeed, when it brings the fugitive along to him that
issued the invitation. Come hither, come hither all ye, also
thou, and thou, and thou, too, thou loneliest of all fugitives!

Thus the invitation goes forth and remains standing, wheresoever
there is a parting of the ways, in order to call out. Ah, just
as the trumpet call of the soldiers is directed to the four
quarters of the globe, likewise does this invitation sound wherever
there is a meeting of roads; with no uncertain sound--for who
would then come?--but with the certitude of eternity.

It stands by the parting of the ways where worldly and earthly
sufferings have set down their crosses, and calls out: Come
hither, all ye poor and wretched ones, ye who in poverty must
slave in order to assure yourselves, not of a care-free, but of
a toilsome, future; ah, bitter contradiction, to have to slave
for--assuring one's self of that under which one groans, of that
which one flees! Ye despised and overlooked ones, about whose
existence no one, aye, no one is concerned, not so much even as
about some domestic animal which is of greater value! Ye sick,
and halt, and blind, and deaf, and crippled, come hither!--Ye
bed-ridden, aye, come hither, ye too; for the invitation makes
bold to invite even the bed-ridden--to come! Ye lepers; for the
invitation breaks down all differences in order to unite all,
it wishes to make good the hardship caused by the difference
in men, the difference which seats one as a ruler over millions,
in possession of all gifts of fortune, and drives another one
out into the wilderness--and why? (ah, the cruelty of it!) because
(ah, the cruel human inference!) because he is wretched, indescribably
wretched. Why then? Because he stands in need of help, or at
any rate, of compassion. And why, then? Because human compassion
is a wretched thing which is cruel when there is the greatest
need of being compassionate, and compassionate only when, at
bottom, it is not true compassion! Ye sick of heart, ye who only
through your anguish learned to know that a man's heart and an
animal's heart are two different things, and what it means to be
sick at heart--what it means when the physician may be right in
declaring one sound of heart and yet heart-sick; ye whom faithlessness
deceived and whom human sympathy--for the sympathy of man is
rarely late in coming--whom human sympathy made a target for
mockery; all ye wronged and aggrieved and ill-used; all ye noble
ones who, as any and everybody will be able to tell you, deservedly
reap the reward of ingratitude (for why were ye simple enough
to be noble, why foolish enough to be kindly, and disinterested,
and faithful)--all ye victims of cunning, of deceit, of backbiting,
of envy, whom baseness chose as its victim and cowardice left
in the lurch, whether now ye be sacrificed in remote and lonely
places, after having crept away in order to die, or whether ye
be trampled underfoot in the thronging crowds where no one asks
what rights ye have, and no one, what wrongs ye suffer, and no
one, where ye smart or how ye smart, whilst the crowd with brute
force tramples you into the dust--come ye hither!

The invitation stands at the parting of the ways, where death
parts death and life. Come hither all ye that sorrow and ye that
vainly labor! For indeed there is rest in the grave; but to sit
by a grave, or to stand by a grave, or to visit a grave, all that
is far from lying in the grave; and to read to one's self again
and again one's own words which one knows by heart, the epitaph
which one devised one's self and understands best, namely, who
it is that lies buried here, all that is not the same as to lie
buried one's self. In the grave there Is rest, but by the grave
there is no rest; for it is said: so far and no farther, and so
you may as well go home again. But however often, whether in your
thoughts or in fact, you return to that grave--you will never get
any farther, you will not get away from the spot, and this is
very trying and is by no means rest. Come ye hither, therefore:
here is the way by which one may go farther, here is rest by
the grave, rest from the sorrow over loss, or rest in the sorrow
of loss--through him who everlastingly re-unites those that are
parted, and more firmly than nature unites parents with their
children, and children with their parents--for, alas! they were
parted; and more closely than the minister unites husband and
wife--for, alas! their separation did come to pass; and more
indissolubly than the bond of friendship unites friend with
friend--for, alas! it was broken. Separation penetrated everywhere
and brought with it sorrow and unrest; but here is rest!--Come
hither also ye who had your abodes assigned to you among the
graves, ye who are considered dead to human society, but neither
missed nor mourned--not buried and yet dead; that is, belonging
neither to life nor to death; ye, alas! to whom human society
cruelly closed its doors and for whom no grave has as yet opened
itself in pity--come hither, ye also, here is rest, and here is
life!

The invitation stands at the parting of the ways, where the road
of sin turns away from the inclosure of innocence--ah, come hither,
ye are so close to him; but a single step in the opposite direction,
and ye are infinitely far from him. Very possibly ye do not yet
stand in need of rest, nor grasp fully what that means; but still
follow the invitation, so that he who invites may save you from
a predicament out of which it is so difficult and dangerous to
be saved; and so that, being saved, ye may stay with him who is
the Savior of all, likewise of innocence. For even if it were
possible that innocence be found somewhere, and altogether pure:
why should not innocence also need a savior to keep it safe from
evil?--The invitation stands at the parting of the ways, where
the road of sin turns away to enter more deeply into sin. Come
hither all ye who have strayed and have been lost, whatever may
have been your error and sin: whether one more pardonable in the
sight of man and nevertheless perhaps more frightful, or one
more terrible in the sight of man and yet, perchance, more pardonable;
whether it be one which became known here on earth or one which,
though hidden, yet is known in heaven--and even if ye found
pardon here on earth without finding rest in your souls, or
found no pardon because ye did not seek it, or because ye sought
it in vain: ah, return and come hither, here is rest!

The invitation stands at the parting of the ways, where the
road of sin turns away for the last time and to the eye is lost
in perdition. Ah, return, return, and come hither! Do not shrink
from the difficulties of the retreat, however great; do not fear
the irksome way of conversion, however laboriously it may lead
to salvation; whereas sin with winged speed and growing pace
leads forward or--downward, so easily, so indescribably easy--as
easily, in fact, as when a horse, altogether freed from having
to pull, cannot even with all his might stop the vehicle which
pushes him into the abyss. Do not despair over each relapse which
the God of patience has patience enough to pardon, and which a
sinner should surely have patience enough to humble himself under.
Nay, fear nothing and despair not: he that sayeth "come hither,"
he is with you on the way, from him come help and pardon on that
way of conversion which leads to him; and with him is rest.

Come hither all, all ye--with him is rest; and he will raise no
difficulties, he does but one thing: he opens his arms. He will
not first ask you, you sufferer--as righteous men, alas, are
accustomed to, even when willing to help--"Are you not perhaps
yourself the cause of your misfortune, have you nothing with
which to reproach yourself?" It is so easy to fall into this
very human error, and from appearances to judge a man's success
or failure: for instance, if a man is a cripple, or deformed,
or has an unprepossessing appearance, to infer that therefore
he is a bad man; or, when a man is unfortunate enough to suffer
reverses so as to be ruined or so as to go down in the world,
to infer that therefore he is a vicious man. Ah, and this is
such an exquisitely cruel pleasure, this being conscious of
one's own righteousness as against the sufferer--explaining his
afflictions as God's punishment, so that one does not even--dare
to help him; or asking him that question which condemns him
and flatters our own righteousness, before helping him. But
he will not ask you thus, will not in such cruel fashion be
your benefactor. And if you are yourself conscious of your sin
he will not ask about it, will not break still further the bent
reed, but raise you up, if you will but join him. He will not
point you out by way of contrast, and place you outside of himself,
so that your sin will stand out as still more terrible, but he
will grant you a hiding place within him; and hidden within him
your sins will be hidden. For he is the friend of sinners. Let
him but behold a sinner, and he not only stands still, opening
his arms and saying "come hither," nay, but he stands--and waits,
as did the father of the prodigal son; or he does not merely
remain standing and waiting, but goes out to search, as the
shepherd went forth to search for the strayed sheep, or as the
woman went to search for the lost piece of silver. He goes--nay,
he has gone, but an infinitely longer way than any shepherd or
any woman, for did he not go the infinitely long way from being
God to becoming man, which he did to seek sinners?




III




COME HITHER UNTO ME ALL YE THAT LABOR AND ARE HEAVY
LADEN, AND I WILL GIVE YOU REST.


"Come hither!" For he supposes that they that labor and are
heavy laden feel their burden and their labor, and that they
stand there now, perplexed and sighing--one casting about with
his eyes to discover whether there is help in sight anywhere;
another with his eyes fixed on the ground, because he can see
no consolation; and a third with his eyes staring heavenward,
as though help was bound to come from heaven--but all seeking.
Therefore he sayeth: "come hither!" But he invites not him who
has ceased to seek and to sorrow.--"Come hither!" For he who
invites knows that it is a mark of true suffering, if one walks
alone and broods in silent disconsolateness, without courage to
confide in any one, and with even less self-confidence to dare
to hope for help. Alas, not only he whom we read about was possessed
of a dumb devil.[6] No suffering which does not first of all
render the sufferer dumb is of much significance, no more than
the love which does not render one silent; for those sufferers
who run on about their afflictions neither labor nor are heavy
laden. Behold, therefore the inviter will not wait till they
that labor and are heavy laden come to him, but calls them lovingly;
for all his willingness to help might, perhaps, be of no avail
if he did not say these words and thereby take the first step;
for in the call of these words: "come hither unto me!" he comes
himself to them. Ah, human compassion--sometimes, perhaps, it is
indeed praiseworthy self-restraint, sometimes, perhaps, even true
compassion, which may cause you to refrain from questioning him
whom you suppose to be brooding over a hidden affliction; but
also, how often indeed is this compassion but worldly wisdom which
does not care to know too much! Ah, human'compassion--how often
was it not pure curiosity, and not compassion, which prompted
you to venture into the secret of one afflicted; and how burdensome
it was--almost like a punishment of your curiosity--when he
accepted your invitation and came to you! But he who sayeth
these redeeming words "Come hither!" he is not deceiving himself
in saying these words, nor will he deceive you when you come to
him in order to find rest by throwing your burden on him. He
follows the promptings of his heart in saying these words, and
his heart follows his words; if you then follow these words,
they will follow you back again to his heart. This follows as
a matter of course--ah, will you not follow the invitation?--"Come
hither!" For he supposes that they that labor and are heavy
laden are so worn out and overtaxed, and so near swooning that
they have forgotten, as though in a stupor, that there is such
a thing as consolation. Alas, or he knows for sure that there
is no consolation and no help unless it is sought from him; and
therefore must he call out to them "Come hither!"


"Come hither!" For is it not so that every society has some
symbol or token which is worn by those who belong to it? When
a young girl is adorned in a certain manner one knows that she
is going to the dance: Come hither all ye that labor and are
heavy laden--come hither! You need not carry an external and
visible badge; come but with your head anointed and your face
washed, if only you labor in your heart and are heavy laden.


"Come hither!" Ah, do not stand still and consider; nay, consider,
consider that with every moment you stand still after having
heard the invitation you will hear the call more faintly and thus
withdraw from it, even though you are standing still.--"Come
hither!" Ah, however weary and faint you be from work, or from
the long, long and yet hitherto fruitless search for help and
salvation, and even though you may feel as if you could not
take one more step, and not wait one more moment, without dropping
to the ground: ah, but this one step and here is rest!--"Come
hither!" But if, alas, there be one who is so wretched that
he cannot come?--Ah, a sigh is sufficient; your mere sighing
or him is also to come hither.




THE PAUSE


COME HITHER UNTO ME ALL YE THAT LABOR AND ARE HEAVY
LADEN, AND I SHALL GIVE YOU REST.


Pause now! But what is there to give pause? That which in the
same instant makes all undergo an absolute change--so that,
instead of seeing an immense throng ofthem that labor and are
heavy laden following the invitation, you will in the end behold
the very opposite, that is, an immense throng of men who flee
back shudderingly, scrambling to get away, trampling all down
before them; so that, if one were to infer the sense of what
had been said from the result it produced, one would have to
infer that the words had been "_procul o procul este profani_,"
rather than "come hither"--that gives pause which is infinitely
more important and infinitely more decisive: THE PERSON OF HIM
WHO INVITES. Not in the sense that he is not the man to do what
he has said, or not God, to keep what he has promised; no, in
a very different sense.


Pause is given by the fact that he who invites is, and insists
on being, the definite historic person he was 1800 years ago,
and that he as this definite person, and living under the conditions
then obtaining, spoke these words of invitation.--He is not, and
does not wish to be, one about whom one may simply know something
from history (i.e. world history, history proper, as against
Sacred History); for from history one cannot "learn" anything
about him, the simple reason being that nothing can be "known"
about him.--He does not wish to be judged in a human way, from
the results of his life; that is, he is and wishes to be, a
rock of offense and the object of faith. To judge him after
the consequences of his life is a blasphemy, for being God, his
life, and the very fact that he was then living and really did
live, is infinitely more important than all the consequences of
it in history.




_A_ Who spoke these words of invitation?


He that invites. Who is he? Jesus Christ. Which Jesus Christ?
He that sits in glory on the right side of his Father? No. From
his seat of glory he spoke not a single word. Therefore it is
Jesus Christ in his lowliness, and in the condition of lowliness,
who spoke these words.

Is then Jesus Christ not the same? Yes, verily, he is today, and
was yesterday, and 1800 years ago, the same who abased himself,
assuming the form of a servant--the Jesus Christ who spake these
words of invitation. It is also he who hath said that he would
return again in glory. In his return in glory he is, again, the
same Jesus Christ; but this has not yet come to pass.

Is he then not in glory now? Assuredly, that the Christian believes.
But it was in his lowly condition that he spoke these words; he
did not speak them from his glory. And about his return in glory
nothing can be known, for this can in the strictest sense be a
matter of belief only. But a believer one cannot become except
by having gone to him in his lowly condition--to him, the rock
of offense and the object of faith. In other shape he does not
exist, for only thus did he exist. That he will return in glory
is indeed expected, but can be expected and believed only by him
who believes, and has believed, in him as he was here on earth.

Jesus Christ is, then, the same; yet lived he 1800 years ago in
debasement, and is transfigured only at his return. As yet he
has not returned; therefore he is still the one in lowly guise
about whom we believe that he will return in glory. Whatever he
said and taught, every word he spoke, becomes _eo ipso_ untrue
if we give it the appearance of having been spoken by Christ in
his glory. Nay, he is silent. It is the lowly Christ who speaks.
The space of time between (i.e. between his debasement and his
return in glory) which is at present about 1800 years, and will
possibly become many times 1800--this space of time, or else
what this space of time tries to make of Christ, the worldly
information about him furnished by world history or church history,
as to who Christ was, as to who it was who really spoke these
words--all this does not concern us, is neither here nor there,
but only serves to corrupt our conception of him, arid thereby
renders untrue these words of invitation.

It is untruthful of me to impute to a person words which he
never used. But it is likewise untruthful, and the words he used
likewise become untruthful, or it becomes untrue that he used
them, if I assign to him a nature essentially unlike the one
he had when he did use them. Essentially unlike; for an untruth
concerning this or the other trifling circumstance will not make
it untrue that "he" said them. And therefore, if it please God
to walk on earth in such strict incognito as only one all-powerful
can assume, in guise impenetrable to all men; if it please him--and
why he does it, for what purpose, that he knows best himself;
but whatever the reason and the purpose, it is certain that
the incognito is of essential significance--I say, if it please
God to walk on earth in the guise of a servant and, to judge
from his appearance, exactly like any other man; if it please
him to teach men in this guise--if, now, any one repeats his
very words, but gives the saying the appearance that it was
God that spoke these words: then it is untruthful; for it is
untrue that h e said these words.




_B_ Can one from history[7] learn to know anything about Christ?


No. And why not? Because one cannot "know" anything at all about
"Christ"; for he is the paradox, the object of faith, and exists
only for faith. But all historic information is communication of
"knowledge." Therefore one cannot learn anything about Christ
from history. For whether now one learn little or much about him,
it will not represent what he was in reality. Hence one learns
something else about him than what is strictly true, and therefore
learns nothing about him, or gets to know something wrong about
him; that is, one is deceived. History makes Christ look different
from what he looked in truth, and thus one learns much from history
about--Christ? No, not about Christ; because about him nothing
can be "known," he can only be believed.




_C_ Can one prove from history that Christ was God?


Let me first ask another question: is any more absurd contradiction
thinkable than wishing to prove (no matter, for the present,
whether one wishes to do so from history, or from whatever else
in the wide world one wishes to prove it) that a certain person
is God? To maintain that a certain person is God--that is, professes
to be God--is indeed a stumbling block in the purest sense. But
what is the nature of a stumbling block? It is an assertion
which is at variance with all (human) reason. Now think of proving
that! But to prove something is to render it reasonable and real.
Is it possible, then, to render reasonable and real what is at
variance with all reason? Scarcely; unless one wishes to contradict
one's self. One can prove only that it is at variance with all
reason. The proofs for the divinity of Christ given in Scripture,
such as the miracles and his resurrection from the grave exist,
too, only for faith; that is, they are no "proofs," for they are
not meant to prove that all this agrees with reason but, on the
contrary, are meant to prove that it is at variance with reason
and therefore a matter of faith.

First, then, let us take up the proofs from history. "Is it not
1800 years ago now that Christ lived, is not his name proclaimed
and reverenced throughout the world, has not his teaching (Christianity)
changed the aspect of the world, having victoriously affected
all affairs: has then history not sufficiently, or more than
sufficiently, made good its claim as to who he was, and that
he was--God?" No, indeed, history has by no means sufficiently,
or more than sufficiently, made good its claim, and in fact
history cannot accomplish this in all eternity. However, as
to the first part of the statement, it is true enough that his
name is proclaimed throughout the world--as to whether it is
reverenced, that I do not presume to decide. Also, it is true
enough that Christianity has transformed the aspect of the world,
having victoriously affected all affairs, so victoriously indeed,
that everybody now claims to be a Christian.

But what does this prove? It proves, at most, that Jesus Christ
was a great man, the greatest, perhaps, who ever lived. But that
he was God--stop now, that conclusion shall with God's help fall
to the ground.

Now, if one intends to introduce this conclusion by assuming that
Jesus Christ was a man, and then considers the 1800 years of
history (i.e. the consequences of his life), one may indeed
conclude with a constantly rising superlative: he was great,
greater, the greatest, extraordinarily and astonishingly the
greatest man who ever lived. If one begins, on the other hand,
with the assumption (of faith) that he was God, one has by so
doing stricken out and car celled the 1800 years as not making
the slightest difference, one way or the other, because the
certainty of faith is on an infinitely higher plane. And one
course or the other one must take; but we shall arrive at sensible
conclusions only if we take the latter.

If one takes the former course one will find it impossible--unless
by committing the logical error of passing over into a different
category--one will find it impossible in the conclusion suddenly
to arrive at the new category "God"; that is, one cannot make
the consequence, or consequences, of--a man's life suddenly
prove at a certain point in the argument that this man was God.
If such a procedure were correct one ought to be able to answer
satisfactorily a question like this: what must the consequence
be, how great the effects, how many centuries must elapse, in
order to infer from the consequences of a man's life--for such
was the assumption--that he was God; or whether it is really
the case that in the year 300 Christ had not yet been entirely
proved to be God, though certainly the most extraordinarily,
astonishingly, greatest man who had ever lived, but that a few
more centuries would be necessary to prove that he was God. In
that case we would be obliged to infer that people in the fourth
century did not look upon Christ as God, and still less they
who lived in the first century; whereas the certainty that he
was God would grow with every century. Also, that in our century
this certainty would be greater than it had ever been, a certainty
in comparison with which the first centuries hardly so much as
glimpsed his divinity. You may answer this question or not, it
does not matter.

In general, is it at all possible by the consideration of the
gradually unfolding consequences of something to arrive at a
conclusion different in quality from what we started with? Is
it not sheer insanity (providing man is sane) to let one's judgment
become so altogether confused as to land in the wrong category?
And if one begins with such a mistake, then how will one be able,
at any subsequent point, to infer from the consequences of something,
that one has to deal with an altogether different, in fact,
infinitely different, category? A foot-print certainly is the
consequence of some creature having made it. Now I may mistake
the track for that of, let us say, a bird; whereas by nearer
inspection, and by following it for some distance, I may make
sure that it was made by some other animal. Very good; but there
was no infinite difference in quality between my first assumption
and my later conclusion. But can I, on further consideration
and following the track still further, arrive at the conclusion:
therefore it was a spirit--a spirit that leaves no tracks? Precisely
the same holds true of the argument that from the consequences
of a human life--for that was the assumption--we may infer that
therefore it was God.

Is God then so like man, is there so little difference between
the two that, while in possession of my right senses, I may
begin with the assumption that Christ was human? And, for that
matter, has not Christ himself affirmed that he was God? On the
other hand, if God and man resemble each other so closely, and
are related to each other to such a degree--that is, essentially
belong to the same category of beings, then the conclusion "therefore
he was God" is nevertheless just humbug, because if that is all
there is to being God, then God does not exist at all. But if
God does exist and, therefore, belongs to a category infinitely
different from man, why, then neither I nor any one else can
start with the assumption that Christ was human and end with
the conclusion that therefore he was God. Any one with a bit
of logical sense will easily recognize that the whole question
about the consequences of Christ's life on earth is incommensurable
with the decision that he is God. In fact, this decision is to
be made on an altogether different plane: man must decide for
himself whether he will believe Christ to be what he himself
affirmed he was, that is, God, or whether he will not believe so.

What has been said--mind you, providing one will take the time
to understand it--is sufficient to make a logical mind stop
drawing any inferences from the consequences of Christ's life:
that therefore he was God. But faith in its own right protests
against every attempt to approach Jesus Christ by the help of
historical information about the consequences of his life. Faith
contends that this whole attempt is--blasphemous. Faith contends
that the only proof left unimpaired by unbelief when it did
away with all the other proofs of the truth of Christianity,
the proof which--indeed, this is complicated business--I say,
which unbelief invented in order to prove the truth of Christianity--the
proof about which so excessively much ado has been made in Christendom,
the proof of 1800 years: as to this, faith contends that it
is--blasphemy.

With regard to a man it is true that the consequences of his
life are more important than his life. If one, then, in order to
find out who Christ was, and in order to find out by some inference,
considers the consequences of his life: why, then one changes
him into a man by this very act--a man who, like other men, is
to pass his examination in history, and history is in this case
as mediocre an examiner as any half-baked teacher in Latin.

But strange! By the help of history, that is, by considering
the consequences of his life, one wishes to arrive at the conclusion
that therefore, therefore he was God; and faith makes the exactly
opposite contention that he who even begins with this syllogism
is guilty of blasphemy. Nor does the blasphemy consist in assuming
hypothetically that Christ was a man. No, the blasphemy consists
in the thought which lies at the bottom of the whole business,
the thought without which one would never start it, and of whose
validity one is fully and firmly assured that it will hold also
with regard to Christ--the thought that the consequences of his
life are more important than his life; in other words, that he
is a man. The hypothesis is: let us assume that Christ was a
man; but at the bottom of this hypothesis, which is not blasphemy
as yet, there lies the assumption that, the consequences of a
man's life being more important than his life, this will hold
true also of Christ. Unless this is assumed one must admit that
one's whole argument is absurd, must admit it before beginning--so
why begin at all? But once it is assumed, and the argument is
started, we have the blasphemy. And the more one becomes absorbed
in the consequences of Christ's life, with the aim of being able
to make sure whether or no he was God, the more blasphemous is
one's conduct; and it remains blasphemous so long as this consideration
is persisted in.

Curious coincidence: one tries to make it appear that, providing
one but thoroughly considers the consequences of Christ's life,
this "therefore" will surely be arrived at--and faith condemns
the very beginning of this attempt as blasphemy, and hence the
continuance in it as a worse blasphemy.

"History," says faith, "has nothing to do with Christ." With
regard to him we have only Sacred History (which is different
in kind from general history), Sacred History which tells of
his life and career when in debasement, and tells also that he
affirmed himself to be God. He is the paradox which history never
will be able to digest or convert into a general syllogism. He
is in his debasement the same as he is in his exaltation--but
the 1800 years, or let it be 18,000 years, have nothing whatsoever
to do with this. The brilliant consequences in the history of
the world which are sufficient, almost, to convince even a professor
of history that he was God, these brilliant consequences surely
do not represent his return in glory! Forsooth, in that case it
were imagined rather meanly! The same thing over again: Christ
is thought to be a man whose return in glory can be, and can become,
nothing else than the consequences of his life in history--whereas
Christ's return in glory is something absolutely different and a
matter of faith. He abased himself and was swathed in rags--he
will return in glory; but the brilliant consequences in history,
especially when examined a little more closely, are too shabby
a glory--at any rate a glory of an altogether incongruous nature,
of which faith therefore never speaks, when speaking about his
glory. History is a very respectable science indeed, only it must
not become so conceited as to take upon itself what the Father
will do, and clothe Christ in his glory, dressing him up with
the brilliant garments of the consequences of his life, as if
that constituted his return. That he was God in his debasement
and that he will return in glory, all this is far beyond the
comprehension of history; nor can all this be got from history,
excepting by an incomparable lack of logic, and however incomparable
one's view of history may be otherwise.

How strange, then, that one ever wished to use history
in order to prove Christ divine.




_D_ Are the consequences of Christ's life more important than
his life?


No, by no means, but rather the opposite; for else Christ were
but a man.

There is really nothing remarkable in a man having lived. There
have certainly lived millions upon millions of men. If the fact
is remarkable, there must have been something remarkable in a
man's life. In other words, there is nothing remarkable in his
having lived, but his life was remarkable for this or that. The
remarkable thing may, among other matters, also be what he accomplished;
that is, the consequences of his life.

But that God lived here on earth in human form, that is infinitely
remarkable. No matter if his life had had no consequences at all--it
remains equally remarkable, infinitely remarkable, infinitely more
remarkable than all possible consequences. Just try to introduce
that which is remarkable as something secondary and you will
straightway see the absurdity of doing so: now, if you please,
whatever remarkable is there in God's life having had remarkable
consequences? To speak in this fashion is merely twaddling.

No, that God lived here on earth, that is what is infinitely
remarkable, that which is remarkable in itself. Assuming that
Christ's life had had no consequences whatsoever--if any one
then undertook to say that therefore his life was not remarkable
it would be blasphemy. For it would be remarkable all the same;
and if a secondary remarkable characteristic had to be introduced
it would consist in the remarkable fact that his life had no
consequences. But if one should say that Christ's life was remarkable
because of its consequences, then this again were a blasphemy; for
it is his life which in itself is the remarkable thing.

There is nothing very remarkable in a man's having lived, but it
is infinitely remarkable that God has lived. God alone can lay
so much emphasis on himself that the fact of his having lived
becomes infinitely more important than all the consequences
which may flow therefrom and which then become a matter of history.




_E_ A comparison between Christ and a man who in his life endured
the same treatment by his times as Christ endured.


Let us imagine a man, one of the exalted spirits, one who was
wronged by his times, but whom history later reinstated in his
rights by proving by the consequences of his life who he was. I
do not deny, by the way, that all this business of proving from
the consequences is a course well suited to "a world which ever
wishes to be deceived." For he who was contemporary with him and
did not understand who he was, he really only imagines that he
understands when he has got to know it by help of the consequences
of the noble one's life. Still, I do not wish to insist on this
point, for with regard to a man it certainly holds true that
the consequences of his life are more important than the fact
of his having lived.

Let us imagine one of these exalted spirits. He lives among
his contemporaries without being understood, his significance
is not recognized--he is misunderstood, and then mocked, persecuted,
and finally put to death like a common evil-doer. But the consequences
of his life make it plain who he was; history which keeps a record
of these consequences re-instates him in his rightful position,
and now he is named in one century after another as the great and
the noble spirit, and the circumstances of his debasement are
almost completely forgotten. It was blindness on the part of his
contemporaries which prevented them from comprehending his true
nature, and wickedness which made them mock him and deride him,
and finally put him to death. But be no more concerned about this;
for only after his death did he really become what he was, through
the consequences of his life which, after all, are by far more
important than his life.

Now is it not possible that the same holds true with regard
to Christ? It was blindness and wickedness on the part of those
times[8]--but be no more concerned about this, history has now
re-instated him, from history we know now who Jesus Christ was,
and thus justice is done him.

Ah, wicked thoughtlessness which thus interprets Sacred History
like profane history, which makes Christ a man! But can one, then,
learn anything from history about Jesus? (_cf. b_) No, nothing.
Jesus Christ is the object of faith--one either believes in him
or is offended by him; for "to know" means precisely that such
knowledge does not pertain to him. History can therefore, to be
sure, give one knowledge in abundance; but "knowledge" annihilates
Jesus Christ.

Again--ah, the impious thoughtlessness!--for one to presume
to say about Christ's abasement: "Let us be concerned no more
about his abasement." Surely, Christ's abasement was not something
which merely happened to him--even if it was the sin of that
generation to crucify him; was surely not something that simply
happened to him and, perhaps, would not have happened to him in
better times. Christ himself wished to be abased and lowly. His
abasement (that is, his walking on earth in humble guise, though
being God) is therefore a condition of his own making, something
he wished to be knotted together, a dialectic knot which no one
shall presume to untie, and which no one will untie, for that
matter, until he himself shall untie it when returning in his glory.

His case is, therefore, not the same as that of a man who, through
the injustice inflicted on him by his times, was not allowed
to be himself or to be valued at his worth, while history revealed
who he was; for Christ himself wished to be abased--it is precisely
this condition which he desired. Therefore, let history not trouble
itself to do him justice, and let us not in impious thoughtlessness
presumptuously imagine that we as a matter of course know who he
was. For that no one knows; and he who believes it must become
contemporaneous with him in his abasement. When God chooses to let
himself be born in lowliness, when he who holds all possibilities
in his hand assumes the form of a humble servant, when he fares
about defenseless, letting people do with him what they list: he
surely knows what he does and why he does it; for it is at all
events he who has power over men, and not men who have power
over him--so let not history be so impertinent as to wish to
reveal who he was.

Lastly--ah the blasphemy!--if one should presume to say that
the percussion which Christ suffered expresses something accidental!
If a man is persecuted by his generation it does not follow
that he has the right to say that this would happen to him in
every age. Insofar there is reason in what posterity says about
letting bygones be bygones. But it is different with Christ!
It is not he who by letting himself be born, and by appearing
in Palestine, is being examined by history; but it is he who
examines, his life is the examination, not only of that generation,
but of mankind. Woe unto the generation that would presumptuously
dare to say: "let bygones be bygones, and forget what he suffered,
for history has now revealed who he was and has done justice by him."

If one assumes that history is really able to do this, then
the abasement of Christ bears an accidental relation to him;
that is to say, he thereby is made a man, an extraordinary man
to whom this happened through the wickedness of that generation--a
fate which he was far from wishing to suffer, for he would gladly
(as is human) have become a great man; whereas Christ voluntarily
chose to be the lowly one and, although it was his purpose to
save the world, wished also to give expression to what the "truth"
suffered then, and must suffer in every generation. But if this
is his strongest desire, and if he will show himself in his
glory only at his return, and if he has not returned as yet;
and if no generation may be without repentance, but on the contrary
every generation must consider itself a partner in the guilt of
that generation: then woe to him who presumes to deprive him of
his lowliness, or to cause what he suffered to be forgotten, and
to clothe him in the fabled human glory of the historic consequences
of his life, which is neither here nor there.




_F_ The Misfortune of Christendom


But precisely this is the misfortune, and has been the misfortune,
in Christendom that Christ is neither the one nor the other--neither
the one he was when living on earth, nor he who will return in
glory, but rather one about whom we have learned to know something
in an inadmissible way from history--that he was somebody or other
of great account. In an inadmissible and unlawful way we have
learned to know him; whereas to believe in him is the only permissible
mode of approach. Men have mutually confirmed one another in the
opinion that the sum total of information about him is available
if they but consider the result of his life and the following
1800 years, i.e. the consequences. Gradually, as this became
accepted as the truth, all pith and strength was distilled out
of Christianity; the paradox was relaxed, one became a Christian
without noticing it, without noticing in the least the possibility
of being offended by him. One took over Christ's teachings, turned
them inside out and smoothed them down--he himself guaranteeing
them, of course, the man whose life had had such immense consequences
in history! All became plain as day--very naturally, since Christianity
in this fashion became heathendom.

There is in Christendom an incessant twaddling on Sundays about
the glorious and invaluable truths of Christianity, its mild
consolation. But it is indeed evident that Christ lived 1800
years ago; for the rock of offense and object of faith has become
a most charming fairy-story character, a kind of divine good
old man.[9] People have not the remotest idea of what it means
to be offended by him, and still less, what it means to worship.
The qualities for which Christ is magnified are precisely those
which would have most enraged one, if one had been contemporaneous
with him; whereas now one feels altogether secure, placing implicit
confidence in the result and, relying altogether on the verdict
of history that he was the great man, concludes therefore that
it is correct to do so. That is to say, it is the correct, arid
the noble, and the exalted, and the true, thing--if it is he who
does it; which is to say, again, that one does not in any deeper
sense take the pains to understand what it is he does, and that
one tries even less, to the best of one's ability and with the
help of God, to be like him in acting rightly and nobly, and in
an exalted manner, and truthfully. For, not really fathoming it
in any deeper sense, one may, in the exigency of a contemporaneous
situation, judge him in exactly the opposite way. One is satisfied
with admiring and extolling and is, perhaps, as was said of a
translator who rendered his original word for word and therefore
without making sense, "too conscientious,"--one is, perhaps, also
too cowardly and too weak to wish to understand his real meaning.

Christendom has done away with Christianity, without being aware
of it. Therefore, if anything is to be done about it, the attempt
must be made to re-introduce Christianity.




II


He who invites is, then, Jesus Christ in his abasement, it is he
who spoke these words of invitation. It is not from his glory
that they are spoken. If that were the case, then Christianity
were heathendom and the name of Christ taken in vain, and for
this reason it cannot be so. But if it were the case that he who
is enthroned in glory had said these words: Come hither--as though
it were so altogether easy a matter to be clasped in the arms of
glory--well, what wonder, then, if crowds of men ran to him! But
they who thus throng to him merely go on a wild goose chase,
imagining they know who Christ is. But that no one knows; and
in order to believe in him one has to begin with his abasement.

He who invites and speaks these words, that is, he whose words
they are--whereas the same words if spoken by some one else are,
as we have seen, an historic falsification--he is the same lowly
Jesus Christ, the humble man, born of a despised maiden, whose
father is a carpenter, related to other simple folk of the very
lowest class, the lowly man who at the same time (which, to be
sure, is like oil poured on the fire) affirms himself to be God.

It is the lowly Jesus Christ who spoke these words. And no word
of Christ, not a single one, have you permission to appropriate
to yourself, you have not the least share in him, are not in any
way of his company, if you have not become his contemporary in
lowliness in such fashion that you have become aware, precisely
like his contemporaries, of his warning: "Blessed is he whosoever
shall not be offended in me.[10]" You have no right to accept
Christ's words, and then lie him away; you have no right to accept
Christ's words, and then in a fantastic manner, and with the aid
of history, utterly change the nature of Christ; for the chatter
of history about him is literally not worth a fig.

It is Jesus Christ in his lowliness who is the speaker. It
is historically true that h e said these words; but so soon as
one makes a change in his historic status, it is false to say
that these words were spoken by him.

This poor and lowly man, then, with twelve poor fellows as his
disciples, all from the lowest class of society, for some time
an object of curiosity, but later on in company only with sinners,
publicans, lepers, and madmen; for one risked honor, life, and
property, or at any rate (and that we know for sure) exclusion
from the synagogue, by even letting one's self be helped by
him--come hither now, all ye that labor and are heavy laden!
Ah, my friend, even if you were deaf and blind and lame and
leprous, if you, which has never been seen or heard before,
united all human miseries in your misery--and if he wished to
help you by a miracle: it is possible that (as is human) you
would fear more than all your sufferings the punishment which
was set on accepting aid from him, the punishment of being cast
out from the society of other men, of being ridiculed and mocked,
day after day, and perhaps of losing your life. It is human
(and it is characteristic of being human) were you to think
as follows: "no, thank you, in that case I prefer to remain deaf
and blind and lame and leprous, rather than accept aid under
such conditions."

"Come hither, come hither, all, ye that labor and are heavy
laden, ah, come hither," lo! he invites you and opens his arms.
Ah, when a gentlemanly man clad in a silken gown says this in
a pleasant, harmonious voice so that the words pleasantly resound
in the handsome vaulted church, a man in silk who radiates honor
and respect on all who listen to him; ah, when a king in purple
and velvet says this, with the Christmas tree in the background
on which are hanging all the splendid gifts he intends to distribute,
why, then of course there is some meaning in these words! But
whatever meaning you may attach to them, so much is sure that
it is not Christianity, but the exact opposite, something as
diametrically opposed to Christianity as may well be; for remember
who it is that invites!

And now judge for yourself--for that you have a right to do;
whereas men really do not have a right to do what is so often
done, viz. to deceive themselves. That a man of such appearance,
a man whose company every one shuns who has the least bit of sense
in his head, or the least bit to lose in the world, that he--well,
this is the absurdest and maddest thing of all, one hardly knows
whether to laugh or to weep about it--that he--indeed, that is
the very last word one would expect to issue from his mouth; for
if he had said: "Come hither and help me," or: "Leave me alone,"
or: "Spare me," or proudly: "I despise you all," we could understand
that perfectly--but that such a man says: "Come hither to me!" why,
I declare, that looks inviting indeed! And still further: "All
ye that labor and are heavy laden"--as though such folk were
not burdened enough with troubles, as though they now, to cap
all, should be exposed to the consequences of associating with
him. And then, finally: "I shall give you rest." What's that?--he
help them? Ah, I am sure even the most good-natured joker who
was contemporary with him would have to say: "Surely, that was
the thing he should have undertaken last of all--to wish to
help others, being in that condition himself! Why, it is about
the same as if a beggar were to inform the police that he had
been robbed. For it is a contradiction that one who has nothing,
and has had nothing, informs us that he has been robbed; and
likewise, to wish to help others when one's self needs help
most." Indeed it is, humanly speaking, the most harebrained
contradiction, that he who literally "hath not where to lay
his head," that he about whom it was spoken truly, in a human
sense, "Behold the man!"--that he should say: "Come hither unto
me all ye that suffer--I shall help!"

Now examine yourself--for that you have a right to do. You have
a right to examine yourself, but you really do not have a right
to let yourself without self-examination be deluded by "the
others" into the belief, or to delude yourself into the belief,
that you are a Christian--therefore examine yourself: supposing
you were contemporary with him! True enough he--alas! he affirmed
himself to be God! But many another madman has made that claim--and
his times gave it as their opinion that he uttered blasphemy.
Why, was not that precisely the reason why a punishment was
threatened for allowing one's self to be aided by him? It was
the godly care for their souls entertained by the existing order
and by public opinion, lest any one should be led astray: it was
this godly care that led them to persecute him in this fashion.
Therefore, before any one resolves to be helped by him, let him
consider that he must not only expect the antagonism of men,
but--consider it well!--even if you could bear the consequences
of that step--but consider well, that the punishment meted out
by men is supposed to be God's punishment of him, "the blasphemer"--of
him who invites!

Come hither now all ye that labor and are heavy laden!

How now? Surely this is nothing to run after--some little pause
is given, which is most fittingly used to go around about by way
of another street. And even if you should not thus sneak out in
some way--always providing you feel yourself to be contemporary
with him--or sneak into being some kind of Christian by belonging
to Christendom: yet there will be a tremendous pause given, the
pause which is the very condition that faith may arise: you are
given pause by the possibility of being offended in him.

But in order to make it entirely clear, and bring it home to our
minds, that the pause is given by him who invites, that it is he
who gives us pause and renders it by no means an easy, but a
peculiarly difficult, matter to follow his invitation, because
one has no right to accept it without accepting also him who
invites--in order to make this entirely clear I shall briefly
review his life under two aspects which, to be sure, show some
difference though both essentially pertain to his abasement.
For it is always an abasement for God to become man, even if
he were to be an emperor of emperors; and therefore he is not
essentially more abased because he is a poor, lowly man, mocked,
and as Scripture adds,[11] spat upon.




THE FIRST PHASE OF HIS LIFE


And now let us speak about him in a homely fashion, just as
his contemporaries spoke about him, and as one speaks about
some contemporary--let him be a man of the same kind as we are,
whom one meets on the street in passing, of whom one knows where
he lives and in what story, what his business is, who his parents
are, his family, how he looks and how he dresses, with whom he
associates, "and there is nothing extraordinary about him, he
looks as men generally look"; in short, let us speak of him as
one speaks of some contemporary about whom one does not make a
great ado; for in living life together with these thousands upon
thousands of real people there is no room for a fine distinction
like this: "Possibly, this man will be remembered in centuries to
come," and "at the same time he is really only a clerk in some
shop who is no whit better than his fellows." Therefore, let us
speak about him as contemporaries speak about some contemporary.
I know very well what I am doing; and I want you to believe that
the canting and indolent world-historic habit we have of always
reverently speaking about Christ (since one has learned all about
it from history, and has heard so much about his having been
something very extraordinary, indeed, or something of that kind)--that
reverent habit, I assure you, is not worth a row of pins but
is, rather, sheer thoughtlessness, hypocrisy, and as such blasphemy;
for it is blasphemy to reverence thoughtlessly him whom one is
either to believe in or to be offended in.

It is the lowly Jesus Christ, a humble man, born of a maiden
of low degree, whose father is a carpenter. To be sure, his
appearance is made under conditions which are bound to attract
attention to him. The small nation among whom he appears, God's
Chosen People as they call themselves, live in anticipation of
a Messiah who is to bring a golden period to land and people.
You must grant that the form in which he appears is as different
as possible from what most people would have expected. On the
other hand, his appearance corresponds more to the ancient prophecies
with which the people are thought to have been familiar. Thus
he presents himself. A predecessor has called attention to him,
and he himself fastens attention very decidedly on himself by
signs and wonders which are noised abroad in all the land--and
he is the hero of the hour, surrounded by unnumbered multitudes
of people wheresoever he fares. The sensation aroused by him
is enormous, every one's eyes are fastened on him, every one
who can go about, aye even those who can only crawl, must see
the wonder--and every one must have some opinion about him,
so that the purveyors of ready-made opinions are put to it because
the demand is so furious and the contradictions so confusing.
And yet he, the worker of miracles, ever remains the humble man
who literally hath not where to lay his head.

And let us not forget: signs and wonders as contemporary events
have a markedly greater elasticity in repelling or attracting
than the tame stories generally re-hashed by the priests, or the
still tamer stories about signs and wonders that happened--1800
years ago! Signs and wonders as contemporary events are something
plaguy and importunate, something which in a highly embarrassing
manner almost compels one to have an opinion, something which,
if one does not happen to be disposed to believe, may exasperate
one excessively by thus forcing one to be contemporaneous with it.
Indeed, it renders existence too complicated, and the more so, the
more thoughtful, developed, and cultured one is. It is a peculiarly
ticklish matter, this having to assume that a man who is contemporaneous
with one really performs signs and wonders; but when he is at some
distance from one, when the consequences of his life stimulate
the imagination a bit, then it is not so hard to imagine, in a
fashion, that one believes it.

As I said, then, the people are carried away with him; they follow
him jubilantly, and see signs and wonders, both those which he
performs and those which he does not perform, and they are glad
in their hope that the golden age will begin, once he is king.
But the crowd rarely have a clear reason for their opinions, they
think one thing today and another tomorrow. Therefore the wise
and the critical will not at once participate. Let us see now
what the wise and the critical must think, so soon as the first
impression of astonishment and surprise has subsided.

The shrewd and critical man would probably say: "Even assuming
that this person is what he claims to be, that is, something
extraordinary--for as to his affirming himself to be God I can,
of course, not consider that as anything but an exaggeration for
which I willingly make allowances, and pardon him, if I really
considered him to be something extraordinary; for I am not a
pedant--assuming then, which I hesitate to do, for it is a matter
on which I shall at any rate suspend my judgment--assuming then
that he is really performing miracles: is it not an inexplicable
mystery that this person can be so foolish, so weak-minded, so
altogether devoid of worldly wisdom, so feeble, or so good-naturedly
vain, or whatever else you please to call it--that he behaves
in this fashion and almost forces his benefactions on men? Instead
of proudly and commandingly keeping people away from himself at
a distance marked by their profoundest submission, whenever he
does allow himself to be seen, at rare occasions: instead of
doing so, think of his being accessible to every one, or rather
himself going to every one, of having intercourse with everybody,
almost as if being the extraordinary person consisted in his
being everybody's servant,[12] as if the extraordinary person
he claims to be were marked by his being concerned only lest
men should fail to be benefited by him--in short as if being
an extraordinary person consisted in being the most solicitous
of all persons. The whole business is inexplicable to me--what
he wants, what his purpose is, what end he has in mind, what he
expects to accomplish; in a word, what the meaning of it all
is. He who by so many a wise saying reveals so profound an insight
into the human heart, he must certainly know what I, using but
half of my wits, can predict for him, viz. that in such fashion
one gets nowhere in the world--unless, indeed, despising prudence,
one consistently, aims to make a fool of one's self or, perchance,
goes so far in sincerity as to prefer being put to death; but
anyone, one desiring that must certainly be crazy. Having such
profound knowledge of the human heart he certainly ought to know
that the thing to do is to deceive people and then to give one's
deception the appearance of being a benefaction conferred on
the whole race. By doing so one reaps all advantages, even the
one whose enjoyment is the sweetest of all, which is, to be called
by one's contemporaries a benefactor of the human race--for, once
in your grave, you may snap your fingers at what posterity may
have to say about you. But to surrender one's self altogether,
as he does, and not to think the least of one's self--in fact,
almost to beg people to accept these benefactions: no, I would
not dream of joining his company. And, of course, neither does he
invite me; for, indeed, he invites only them that labor and
are heavy laden."

Or he would reason as follows: "His life is simply a fantastic
dream. In fact, that is the mildest expression one can use about
it; for, when judging him in this fashion, one is good-natured
enough to forget altogether the evidence of sheer madness in his
claim to be God. This is wildly fantastical. One may possibly
live a few years of one's youth in such fashion. But he is now
past thirty years. And he is literally nothing. Still further,
in a very short time he will necessarily lose all the respect
and reputation he has gained among the people, the only thing,
you may say, he has gained for himself. One who wishes to keep
in the good graces of the people--the riskiest chance imaginable,
I will admit--he must act differently. Not many months will
pass before the crowd will grow tired of one who is so altogether
at their service. He will be regarded as a ruined person, a kind
of outcast, who ought to be glad to end his days in a corner,
the world forgetting, by the world forgot; providing he does
not, by continuing his previous behavior, prefer to maintain
his present attitude and be fantastic enough to wish to be put
to death, which is the unavoidable consequence of persevering
in that course. What has he done for his future? Nothing. Has
he any assured position? No. What expectations has he? None.
Even this trifling matter: what will he do to pass the time
when he grows older, the long winter nights, what will he do
to make them pass--why, he cannot even play cards! He is now
enjoying a bit of popular favor--in truth, of all movable property
the most movable--which in a trice may turn into an enormous
popular hatred of him.--Join his company? No, thank you, I am
still, thank God, in my right mind."

Or he may reason as follows: "That there is something extraordinary
about this person--even if one reserves the right, both one's own
and that of common sense, to refrain from venturing any opinion
as to his claim of being God--about that there is really little
doubt. Rather, one might be indignant at Providence's having
entrusted such a person with these powers--a person who does
the very opposite of what he himself bids us do: that we shall
not cast our pearls before the swine; for which reason he will,
as he himself predicts, come to grief by their turning about and
trampling him under their feet. One may always expect this of
swine; but, on the other hand, one would not expect that he who
had himself called attention to this likelihood, himself would
do precisely[13] what he knows one should not do. If only there
were some means of cleverly stealing his wisdom--for I shall
gladly leave him in undisputed possession of that very peculiar
thought of his that he is God--if one could but rob his wisdom
without, at the same time, becoming his disciple! If one could
only steal up to him at night and lure it from him; for I am
more than equal to editing and publishing it, and better than
he, if you please. I undertake to astonish the whole world by
getting something altogether different out of it; for I clearly
see there is something wondrously profound in what he says, and
the misfortune is only that he is the man he is. But perhaps,
who knows, perhaps it is feasible, anyway, to fool him out of
it. Perhaps in that respect too he is good-natured and simple
enough to communicate it quite freely to me. It is not impossible;
for it seems to me that the wisdom he unquestionably possesses,
evidently has been entrusted to a fool, seeing there is so much
contradiction in his life.--But as to joining his company and
becoming his disciple--no, indeed, that would be the same as
becoming'a fool oneself." Or he might reason as follows: "If
this person does indeed mean to further what is good and true
(I do not venture to decide this), he is helpful at least, in
this respect, to youths and inexperienced people. For they will
be benefited, in this serious life of ours, by learning, the
sooner the better, and very thoroughly--he opens the eyes even
of the blindest to this--that all this pretense of wishing to
live only for goodness and truth contains a considerable admixture
of the ridiculous. He proves how right the poets of our times
are when they let truth and goodness be represented by some
half-witted fellow, one who is so stupid that you can knock
down a wall with him. The idea of exerting one's self, as this
man does, of renouncing everything but pains and trouble, to be
at beck and call all day long, more eager than the busiest family
physician--and pray why? Because he makes a living by it? No, not
in the very least; it has never occurred to him, as far as I
can see, to want something in return. Does he earn any money by
it? No, not a red cent--he has not a red cent to his name, and
if he did he would forthwith give it away. Does he, then, aspire
to a position of honor and dignity in the state? On the contrary,
he loathes all worldly honor. And he who, as I said, condemns
all worldly honor, and practices the art of living on nothing;
he who, if any one, seems best fitted to pass his life in a most
comfortable _dolce far niente_--which is not such a bad thing--:
he lives under a greater strain than any government official who
is rewarded by honor and dignity, lives under a greater strain
than any business man who earns money like sand. Why does he
exert himself thus, or (why this question about a matter not
open to question?) why should any one exert himself thus--in
order to attain to the happiness of being ridiculed, mocked,
and so forth? To be sure, a peculiar kind of pleasure! That one
should push one's way through a crowd to reach the spot where
money, honor, and glory are distributed--why, that is perfectly
understandable; but to push forward to be whipped: how exalted,
how Christian, how stupid!"

Or he will reason as follows: "One hears so many rash opinions
about this person from people who understand nothing--and worship
him; and so many severe condemnations of him by those who, perhaps,
misunderstand him after all. As for me, I am not going to allow
myself to be accused of venturing a hasty opinion. I shall keep
entirely cool and calm; in fact, which counts for still more, I
am conscious of being as reasonable and moderate with him as is
possible. Grant now--which, to be sure. I do only to a certain
extent--grant even that one's reason is impressed by this person.
What, then, is my opinion about him? My opinion is, that for the
present, I can form no opinion about him. I do not mean about his
claim of being God; for about that I can never in all eternity
have an opinion. No, I mean about him as a man. Only by the
consequences of his life shall we be able to decide whether
he was an extraordinary person or whether, deceived by his imagination,
he applied too high a standard, not only to himself, but also to
humanity in general. More I cannot do for him, try as I may--if
he were my only friend, my own child, I could not judge him more
leniently, nor differently, either. It follows from this, to be
sure, that in all probability, and for good reasons, I shall
not ever be able to have any opinion about him. For in order to
be able to form an opinion I must first see the consequences of
his life, including his very last moments; that is, he must be
dead. Then, and perhaps not even then, may I form an opinion of
him. And even granting this, it is not really an opinion about
him, for he is then no more. No more is needed to say why it is
impossible for me to join him while he is living. The authority
he is said to show in his teaching can have no decisive influence
in my case; for it is surely easy to see that his thought moves
in a circle. He quotes as authority that which he is to prove,
which in its turn can be proved only by the consequences of his
life; provided, of course, it is not connected with that fixed
idea of his about being God, because if it is therefore he has
this authority (because he is God) the answer must be: yes--if!
So much, however, I may admit, that if I could imagine myself
self living in some later age, and if the consequences of his
life as shown in history had made it plain that he was the extraordinary
person he in a former age claimed to be, then it might very well
be--in fact, I might come very near, becoming his disciple."

An ecclesiastic would reason as follows: "For an impostor and
demagogue he has, to say the truth, a remarkable air of honesty
about him; for which reason he cannot be so absolutely dangerous,
either, even though the situation looks dangerous enough while
the squall is at its height, and even though the situation looks
dangerous enough with his enormous popularity--until the squall
has passed over and the people--yes, precisely the people--overthrow
him again. The honest thing about him is his claim to be the
Messiah when he resembles him so little as he does. That is honest,
just as if some one in preparing bogus paper-money made the bills
so poorly that every one who knows the least about it cannot fail
to detect the fraud.--True enough, we all look forward to a
Messiah, but surely no one with any sense expects God himself
to come, and every religious person shudders at the blasphemous
attitude of this person. We look forward to a Messiah, we are all
agreed on that. But the governance of the world does not go forward
tumultuously, by leaps and bounds; the development of the world,
as is indicated by the very fact that it is a development, proceeds
by evolution, not by revolution. The true Messiah will therefore
look quite different, and will arrive as the most glorious flower,
and the highest development, of that which already exists. Thus
will the true Messiah come, and he will proceed in an entirely
different fashion: he will recognize the existing order as the
basis of things, he will summon all the clergy to council and
present to them the results accomplished by him, as well as his
credentials--and then, if he obtain the majority of the votes
when the ballot is cast, he will be received and saluted as the
extraordinary person, as the one he is: the Messiah.[14]

"However, there is a duplicity in this man's behavior; he assumes
too much the role of judge. It seems as if he wished to be, at
one and the same time, both the judge who passes sentence on the
existing order of things, and the Messiah. If he does not wish
to play the role of the judge, then why his absolute isolation,
his keeping at a distance from all which has to do with the
existing order of things? And if he does not wish to be the
judge, then why his fantastic flight from reality to join the
ignorant crowd, then why with the haughtiness of a revolutionary
does he despise all the intelligence and efficiency to be found
in the existing order of things? And why does he begin afresh
altogether, and absolutely from the bottom up, by the help of--fishermen
and artisans? May not the fact that he is an illegitimate child
fitly characterize his entire relation to the existing order
of things? On the other hand, if he wishes to be only the Messiah,
why then his warning about putting a piece of new cloth unto an
old garment.[15] For these words are precisely the watchwords
of every revolution since they are expressive of a person's
discontent with the existing order and of his wish to destroy
it. That is, these words reveal his desire to remove existing
conditions, rather than to build on them and better them, if
one is a reformer, or to develop them to their highest possibility,
if one is indeed the Messiah. This is duplicity. In fact, it is
not feasible to be both judge and Messiah. Such duplicity will
surely result in his downfall.[16] The climax in the life of a
judge is his death by violence, and so the poet pictures it
correctly; but the climax in the life of the Messiah cannot
possibly be his death. Or else, by that very fact, he would
not be the Messiah, that is, he whom the existing order expects
in order to deify him. This duplicity has not as yet been recognized
by the people, who see in him their Messiah; but the existing
order of things cannot by any manner of means recognize him as
such. The people, the idle and loafing crowd, can do so only
because they represent nothing less than the existing order
of things. But as soon as the duplicity becomes evident to them,
his doom is sealed. Why, in this respect his predecessor was
a far more definitely marked personality, for he was but one
thing, the judge. But what confusion and thoughtlessness, to wish
to be both, and what still worse confusion, to acknowledge his
predecessor as the judge--that is, in other words, precisely to
make the existing order of things receptive and ripe for the
Messiah who is to come after the judge, and yet not wish to
associate himself with the existing order of things!"

And the philosopher would reason as follows: "Such dreadful
or, rather, insane vanity, that a single individual claims to
be God, is a thing hitherto unheard of. Never before have we
been witness to such an excess of pure subjectivity and sheer
negation. He has no doctrines, no system of philosophy, he knows
really nothing, he simply keeps on repeating, and making variations
on, some unconnected aphoristic sentences, some few maxims, and
a couple of parables by which he dazzles the crowd for whom he
also performs signs and wonders; so that they, instead of learning
something, or being improved, come to believe in one who in a
most brazen way constantly forces his subjective views on us.
There is nothing objective or positive whatever in him and in
what he says. Indeed, from a philosophical point of view, he
does not need to fear destruction for he has perished already,
since it is inherent in the nature of subjectivity to perish.
One may in all fairness admit that his subjectivity is remarkable
and that, be it as it may with the other miracles, he constantly
repeats his miracle with the five small loaves,[17] viz., by
means of a few lyric utterances and some aphorisms he rouses
the whole country. But even if one were inclined to overlook
his insane notion of affirming himself to be God, it is an
incomprehensible mistake, which, to be sure, demonstrates a
lack of philosophic training, to believe that God could reveal
himself in the form of an individual. The race, the universal,
the total, is God; but the race surely is not an individual!
Generally speaking, that is the impudent assumption of subjectivity,
which claims that the individual is something extraordinary.
But sheer insanity is shown in the claim of an individual to
be God. Because if the insane thing were possible, viz. that
an individual might be God, why, then this individual would
have to be worshipped, and a more beastly philosophic stupidity
is not conceivable."

The astute statesman would reason as follows: "That at present
this person wields great power is undeniable--entirely disregarding,
of course, this notion of his that he is God. Foibles like these,
being idiosyncrasies, do not count against a man and concern no
one, least of all a statesman. A statesman is concerned only
with what power a man wields; and that he does wield great power
cannot, as I have remarked, be denied. But what he intends to do,
what his aim is, I cannot make out at all. If this be calculation
it must be of an entirely new and peculiar order, not so altogether
unlike what is otherwise called madness. He possesses points of
considerable strength; but he seems to defeat, rather than to
use, it; he expends it without himself getting any returns. I
consider him a phenomenon with which--as ought to be one's rule
with all phenomena--a wise man should not have anything to do,
since it is impossible to calculate him or the catastrophe threatening
his life. It is possible that he will be made king. It is possible,
I say; but it is not impossible, or rather, it is just as possible,
that he may end on the gallows. He lacks earnestness in all his
endeavors. With all his enormous stretch of wings he only hovers
and gets nowhere. He does not seem to have any definite plan of
procedure, but just hovers. Is it for his nationality he is fighting,
or does he aim at a communistic revolution? Does he wish to establish
a republic or a kingdom? With which party does he affiliate
himself to combat which party, or does he wish to fight all
parties?

"I have anything to do with him?--No, that would be the very
last thing to enter my mind. In fact, I take all possible precautions
to avoid him. I keep quiet, undertake nothing, act as if I did
not exist; for one cannot even calculate how he might interfere
with one's undertakings, be they ever so unimportant, or at any
rate, how one might become involved in the vortex of his activities.
Dangerous, in a certain sense enormously dangerous, is this
man. But I calculate that I may ensnare him precisely by doing
nothing. For overthrown he must be. And this is done most; safely
by letting him do it himself, by letting him stumble over himself.
I have, at least at this moment, not sufficient power to bring
about his fall; in fact, I know no one who has. To undertake the
least thing against him now, means to be crushed one's self. No,
my plan is constantly to exert only negative resistance to him,
that is, to do nothing, and he will probably involve himself
in the enormous consequences he draws after him, till in the
end he will tread on his own train, as it were, and thus fall."

And the steady citizen would reason as follows (which would
then become the opinion of his family): "Now, let us be human,
everything is good when done in moderation, too little and too
much spoil everything, and as a French saying has it which I
once heard a traveling salesman use: every power which exceeds
itself comes to a fall--and as to this person, his fall is certainly
sure enough. I have earnestly spoken to my son and warned and
admonished him not to drift into evil ways and join that person.
And why? Because all people are running after him. That is to
say, what sort of people? Idlers and loafers, street-walkers and
tramps, who run after everything. But mightily few of the men
who have house and property, and nobody who is wise and respected,
none after whom I set my clock, neither councillor Johnson, nor
senator Anderson, nor the wealthy broker Nelson--oh no! they
know what's what. And as to the ministry who ought to know most
about such matters--ah, they will have none of him. What was it
pastor Green said in the club the other evening? 'That man will
yet come to a terrible end,' he said. And Green, he can do more
than preach, you oughtn't to hear him Sundays in church so much
as Mondays in the club--I just wished I had half his knowledge
of affairs! He said quite correctly, and as if spoken out of
my own heart: 'Only idlers and loafers are running after that
man.' And why do they run after him? Because he performs some
miracles. But who is sure they are miracles, or that he can
confer the same power on his disciples? And, in any case, a
miracle is something mightily uncertain, whereas the certain
is the certain. Every serious father who has grown-up children
must be truly alarmed lest his sons be seduced and join that
man together with the desperate characters who follow him--desperate
characters who have nothing to lose. And even these, how does
he help them? Why, one must be mad to wish to be helped in this
fashion. Even the poorest beggar is brought to a worse estate
than his former one, is brought to a pass he could have escaped
by remaining what he was, that is, a beggar and no more."

And the mocker, not the one hated on account of his malice, but
the one who is admired for his wit and liked for his good nature,
he would reason as follows: "It is, after all, a rich idea which
is going to prove useful to all of us, that an individual who
is in no wise different from us claims to be God. If that is
not being a benefactor of the race then I don't know what charity
and beneficence are. If we assume that the characteristic of
being God--well, who in all the world would have hit on that
idea? How true that such an idea could not have entered into
the heart of man[18]--but if we assume that it consists in looking
in no wise different from the rest of us, and in nothing else:
why, then we are all gods. Q. E. D. Three cheers for him, the
inventor of a discovery so extraordinarily important for mankind!
Tomorrow I, the undersigned, shall proclaim that I am God, and
the discoverer at least will not be able to contradict me without
contradicting himself. At night all cats are gray; and if to
be God consists in looking like the rest of us, absolutely and
altogether like the rest of mankind: why, then it is night and
we all are..., or what is it I wanted to say: we all are God,
every one of us, and no one has a right to say he isn't as well
off as his neighbor. This is the most ridiculous situation imaginable,
the contradiction here being the greatest imaginable, and a
contradiction always making for a comical effect. But this is
in no wise my discovery, but solely that of the discoverer:
this idea that a man of exactly the same appearance as the rest
of us, only not half so well dressed as the average man, that
is, a poorly dressed person who, rather than being God, seems
to invite the attention of the society for the relief of the
poor--that he is God! I am only sorry for the director of the
charitable society that he will not get a raise from this general
advancement of the human race but that he will, rather, lose
his job on account of this, etc."

Ah, my friend, I know well what I am doing, I know my responsibility,
and my soul is altogether assured of the correctness of my procedure.
Now then, imagine yourself a contemporary of him who invites.
Imagine yourself to be a sufferer, but consider well to what you
expose yourself in becoming his disciple and following him. You
expose yourself to losing practically everything in the eyes of
all wise and sensible and respected men. He who invites demands
of you that you surrender all, give up everything; but the common
sense of your own times and of your contemporaries will not give
you up, but will judge that to join him is madness. And mockery
will descend cruelly upon you; for while it will almost spare him,
out of compassion, you will be thought madder than a march-hare
for becoming his disciple. People will say: "That h e is a wrong-headed
enthusiast, that can't be helped. Well and good; but to become--in
all seriousness--his disciple, that is the greatest piece of
madness imaginable. There surely is but one possibility of being
madder than a madman, which is the higher madness of joining
a madman in all seriousness and regarding him as a sage."

Do not say that the whole presentation above is exaggerated.
Ah, you know (but, possibly, have not fully realized it) that
among all the respectable men, among all the enlightened and
sensible men, there was but one--though it is easily possible
that one or the other of them, impelled by curiosity, entered
into conversation with him--that there was but one among them
who sought him in all seriousness.[19] And he came to him--in
the night! And as you know, in the night one walks on forbidden
paths, one chooses the night to go to places of which one does
not like to be known as a frequenter. Consider the opinion of
the inviter implied in this--it was a disgrace to visit him,
something no man of honor could afford to do, as little as to
pay a nightly visit to--but no, I do not care to say in so many
words what would follow this "as little as."

Come hither to me now all ye that labor and are heavy laden,
and I will give you rest.




THE SECOND PHASE OF HIS LIFE


His end was what all the wise and the sensible, the statesmen and
the citizens and the mockers, etc., predicted it would be. And as
was later spoken to him, in a moment when, it would seem, the
most hardened ought to have been moved to sympathy, and the very
stones to tears: "He saved others; let him save himself,[20]"
and as it has been repeated thousands upon thousands of times,
by thousands upon thousands: "What was it he spoke of before,
saying his hour was not yet come[21]--is it come now, perchance?"--It
has been repeated, alas, the while the single individual, the
believer, shudders whenever considering--while yet unable to
refrain from gazing into the depth of what to men is a meaningless
absurdity--shudders when considering that God in human guise,
that his divine teaching, that these signs and wonders which
might have made a very Sodom and Gomorrha reform its ways, in
reality produced the exact opposite, and caused the teacher
to be shunned, hated, despised.

Who he is, one can recognize more easily now when the powerful
ones and the respected ones, and all the precautionary measures
of those upholding the existing order, have corrected any wrong
conception one might have entertained about him at first--now
when the people have lost their patience to wait for a Messiah,
seeing that his life, instead of rising in dignity, lapsed into
ever greater degradation. Who, pray, does not recognize that a
man is judged according to the society in which he moves--and
now, think of his society! Indeed, his society one might well
designate as equivalent to being expelled from "human society";
for his society are the lowest classes of the people, with sinners
and publicans among them, people whom everybody with the slightest
self-respect shuns for the sake of his good name and reputation--and
a good name and reputation surely are about the least one can
wish to preserve. In his company there are, furthermore, lepers
whom every one flees, madmen who can only inspire terror, invalids
and wretches--squalor and misery. Who, then, is this person
that, though followed by such a company, still is the object
of the persecution of the mighty ones? He is one despised as
a seducer of men, an impostor, a blasphemer! And if any one
enjoying a good reputation refrains from expressing contempt
of him, it is really only a kind of compassion; for to fear
him is, to be sure, something different.

Such, then, is his appearance; for take care not to be influenced
by anything that you may have learned after the event--as, how
his exalted spirit, with an almost divine majesty, never was
so markedly manifest as just them. Ah, my friend, if you were
the contemporary of one who is not only himself "excluded from
the synagogue" but, as you will remember, whose very help meant
being "excluded from the synagogue"--I say, if you were the
contemporary of an outcast, who in every respect answers to
that term, (for everything has two sides): then you will scarcely
be the man to explain all this in terms directly contrary to
appearances;[22] or, which is the same thing, you will not be
the "single individual" which, as you well know, no one wants
to be, and to be which is regarded as a ridiculous oddity, perhaps
even as a crime.

And now--for they are his society chiefly--as to his apostles!
What absurdity; though not--what new absurdity, for it is quite
in keeping with the rest--his apostles are some fishermen, ignorant
people who but the other day followed their trade. And tomorrow,
to pile one absurdity on the other, they are to go out into the
wide world and transform its aspect. And it is he who claims to
be God, and these are his duly appointed apostles! Now, is he to
make his apostles respected, or are perhaps the apostles to make
him respected? Is he, the inviter, is he an absurd dreamer?
Indeed, his procession would make it seem so; no poet could
have hit on a better idea. A teacher, a sage, or whatever you
please to call him, a kind of stranded genius, who affirms himself
to be God--surrounded by a jubilant mob, himself accompanied by
some publicans, criminals, and lepers; nearest to him a chosen
few, his apostles. And these judges so excellently competent as
to what truth is, these fishermen, tailors, and shoe-makers,
they do not only admire him, their teacher and master, whose
every word is wisdom and truth: they do not only see what no
one else can see, his exaltedness and holiness, nay, but they
see God in him and worship him. Certainly, no poet could invent
a better situation, and it is doubtful if the poet would not
forget the additional item that this same person is feared by
the mighty ones and that they are scheming to destroy him. His
death alone can reassure and satisfy them. They have set an
ignominious punishment on joining his company, on merely accepting
aid from him; and yet they do not feel secure, and cannot feel
altogether reassured that the whole thing is mere wrong-headed
enthusiasm and absurdity. Thus the mighty ones. The populace
who had Idolized him, the populace have pretty nearly given
him up, only in moments does their old conception of him blaze
forth again. In all his existence there is not a shred the most
envious of the envious might envy him to have. Nor do the mighty
ones envy his life. They demand his death for safety's sake, so
that they may have peace again, when all has returned to the
accustomed ways, peace having been made still more secure by
the warning example of his death.


These are the two phases of his life. It began with the people's
idolizing him, whereas all who were identified with the existing
order of things, all who had power and influence, vengefully,
but in a cowardly and hidden manner, laid their snares for him--in
which he was caught, then? Yes, but he perceived it well. Finally
the people discover that they had been deceived in him, that
the fulfillment he would bring them answered least of all to
their expectations of wonders and mountains of gold. So the
people deserted him and the mighty ones drew the snare about
him--in which he was caught, then? Yes, but he perceived it
well. The mighty ones drew the snare together about him--and
thereupon the people, who then saw themselves completely deceived,
turned against him in hatred and rage.

And--to include that too--compassion would say; or, among the
compassionate ones--for compassion is sociable, and likes to
assemble together, and you will find spitefulness and envy keeping
company with whining soft-headedness: since, as a heathen philosopher
observed long ago, no one is so ready to sympathize as an envious
person--among the compassionate ones the verdict would be: it is
really too bad that this good-hearted fellow is to come to such
an end. For he was really a good sort of fellow. Granting it was
an exaggeration to claim to be God, he really was good to the
poor and the needy, even if in an odd manner, by becoming one of
them and going about in the company of beggars. But there is
something touching in it all, and one can't help but feel sorry
for the poor fellow who is to suffer such a miserable death.
For you may say what you will, and condemn him as strongly as
you will, I cannot help feeling pity for him. I am not so heard-hearted
as not to feel compassion.

We have arrived at the last phase, not of Sacred History, as
handed down by the apostles and disciples who believed in Christ,
but of profane history, its counterpart.

Come hither now, all ye that labor and are heavy laden; that is,
if you feel the need, even if you are of all sufferers the most
miserable--if you feel the need of being helped in this fashion,
that is, to fall into still greater suffering, then come hither,
he will help you.




III




THE INVITATION AND THE INVITER


Let us forget for a little while what, in the strictest sense,
constitutes the "offense"; which is, that the inviter claims
to be God. Let us assume that he did not claim to be more than
a man, and let us then consider the inviter and his invitation.


The invitation is surely inviting enough. How, then, shall one
explain the bad relation which did exist, this terribly wrong
relation, that no one, or practically no one, accepted the invitation;
that, on the contrary, all, or practically all--alas! and was
it not precisely all who were invited?--that practically all
were at one in offering resistance to the inviter, in wishing
to put him to death, and in setting a punishment on accepting
aid from him? Should one not expect that after an invitation
such as he issued all, all who suffered, would come crowding
to him, and that all they who were not suffering would crowd
to him, touched by the thought of such compassion and mercy,
and that thus the whole race would be at one in admiring and
extolling the inviter? How is the opposite to be explained?
For that this was the outcome is certain enough; and the fact
that it all happened in those remote times is surely no proof
that the generation then living was worse than other generations!
How could any one be so thoughtless as to believe that? For
whoever gives any thought to the matter will easily see that
it happened in that generation only because they chanced to
be contemporaneous with him. How then explain that it happened--that
all came to that terribly wrong end, so opposite to what ought
to have been expected?

Well, in the first place, if the inviter had looked the figure
which purely human compassion would have him be; and, in the
second place, if he had entertained the purely human conception
of what constitutes man's misery--why, then it would probably
not have happened.

In the first place: According to this human conception of him
he should have been a most generous and sympathetic person, and
at the same time possessed of all qualifications requisite for
being able to help in all troubles of this world, ennobling the
help thus extended by a profound and heartfelt human compassion.
Withal (so they would imagine him) he should also have been a
man of some distinction and not without a certain amount of
human self-assertion--the consequence of which would be, however,
that he would neither have been able, in his compassion, to
reach down to all sufferers, nor yet to have comprehended fully
what constitutes the misery of man and of mankind.

But divine compassion, the infinite unconcern which takes thought
only of those that suffer, and not in the least of one's self,
and which with absolute unconcern takes thought of all that suffer:
that will always seem to men only a kind of madness, and they will
ever be puzzled whether to laugh or to weep about it. Even if
nothing else had militated against the inviter, this alone would
have been sufficient to make his lot hard in the world.

Let a man but try a little while to practice divine compassion,
that is, to be somewhat unconcerned in his compassion, and you
will at once perceive what the opinion of mankind would be.
For example: let one who could occupy some higher rank in society,
let him not (preserving all the while the distinction of his
position) lavishly give to the poor, and philanthropically (i.e.
in a superior fashion) visit the poor and the sick and the wretched--no,
let him give up altogether the distinction of his position and
in all earnest choose the company of the poor and the lowly,
let him live altogether with the people, with workmen, hodmen,
mortar-mixers, and the like! Ah, in a quiet moment, when not
actually beholding him, most of us will be moved to tears by
the mere thought of it; but no sooner would they see him in
this company--him who might have attained to honor and dignity
in the world--see him walking along in such goodly company,
with a bricklayer's apprentice on his right side and a cobbler's
boy on his left, but--well, what then? First they would devise
a thousand explanations to explain that it is because of queer
notions, or obstinacy, or pride, or vanity that he chooses this
mode of life. And even if they would refrain from attributing
to him these evil motives they will never be reconciled with
the sight of him--in this company. The noblest person in the
world will be tempted to laugh, the moment he sees it.

And if all the clergymen in the world, whether in velvet or
in silk or in broadcloth or in satin, contradicted me I would
say: "You lie, you only deceive people with your Sunday sermons.
Because it will always be possible for a contemporary to say
about one so compassionate (who, it is to be kept in mind, is
our contemporary): I believe he is actuated by vanity, and
that is why I laugh and mock at him; but if he were truly compassionate,
or had I been contemporary with him, the noble one--why then!"
And now, as to those exalted ones "who were not understood by
men"--to speak in the fashion of the usual run of sermons--why,
sure enough, they are dead. In this fashion these people succeed
in playing hide and seek. You simply assume that every contemporary
who ventures out so far is actuated only by vanity; and as to
the departed, you assume that they are dead and that they, therefore,
were among the glorious ones.

It must be remembered, to be sure, that every person wishes
to maintain his own level in life, and this fixed point, this
steady endeavor, is one of the causes which limit human compassion
to a certain sphere. The cheese-monger will think that to live
like the inmate of a poorhouse is going too far in expressing
one's sympathy; for the sympathy of the cheese-monger is biased
in one regard which is, his regard of the opinion of other cheese-mongers
and of the saloon-keepers. His compassion is therefore not without
its limitations. And thus with every class--and the journalists,
living as they do on the pennies of the poor, under the pretense
of asserting and defending their rights, they would be the first
to heap ridicule on this unlimited compassion.

To identify one's self wholly and literally with him who is
most miserable (and this, only this, is divine compassion),
that is to men the "too much" by which one is moved to tears,
in a quiet Sunday hour, and about which one unconsciously bursts
into laughter when one sees it in reality. The fact is, it is
too exalted a sight for daily use; one must have it at some
distance to be able to support it. Men are not so familiar with
exalted virtue to believe it at once. The contradiction seen
here is, therefore, that this exalted virtue manifests itself
in--reality, in daily life, quite literally the daily life.
When the poet or the orator illustrates this exalted virtue,
that is, pictures it in a poetical distance from real life,
men are moved; but to see this exalted virtue in reality, the
reality of daily life, here in Copenhagen, on the Market Square,
in the midst of busy every-day life--! And when the poet or
the orator does touch people it is only for a short time, and
just so long are men able to believe, almost, in this exalted
virtue. But to see it in real life every day--! To be sure,
there is an enormous contradiction in the statement that the
most exalted of all has become the most every-day occurrence!

Insofar, then, it was certain in advance what would be the inviter's
fate, even if nothing else had contributed to his doom. The
absolute,[23] or all which makes for an absolute standard, becomes
by that very fact the victim. For men are willing enough to
practice sympathy and self-denial, are willing enough to strive
for wisdom, etc.; but they wish themselves to determine the
standard and to have that read: "to a certain degree." They do
not wish to do away with all these splendid virtues. On the
contrary, they want--at a bargain and in all comfort--to have
the appearance and the name of practicing them. Truly divine
compassion is therefore necessarily the victim so soon as it
shows itself in this world. It descends on earth out of compassion
for mankind, and yet it is mankind who trample upon it. And
whilst it is wandering about among them, scarcely even the sufferer
dares to flee to it, for fear of mankind. The fact is, it is
most important for the world to keep up the appearance of being
compassionate; but this it made out by divine compassion to
be a falsehood--and therefore: away with divine compassion!

But now the inviter represented precisely this divine compassion--and
therefore he was sacrificed, and therefore even those that suffered
fled from him; for they comprehended (and, humanly speaking, very
exactly), what is true of most human infirmities, that one is better
off to remain what one is than to be helped by him.

In the second place: the inviter likewise had an other, and
altogether different, conception than the purely human one as
to what constitutes man's misery. And in this sense only he
was intent on helping; for he had with him neither money, nor
medicine, nor anything else of this kind.

Indeed, the inviter's appearance is so altogether different
from what human compassion wold imagine it that he is a downright
offense to men. In a purely human sense there is something positively
cruel--something outrageous, something so exasperating as to make
one wish to kill that person--in the fact of his inviting to
him the poor and the sick and the suffering, and then not being
able to do anything for them, except to promise them remission
of their sins. "Let us be human, man is no spirit. And when a
person is about to die of starvation and you say to him: I promise
you the gracious remission of your sins--that is revolting cruelty.
In fact it is ridiculous, though too serious a matter to laugh about."

Well (for in quoting these sentiments I wish merely to let offended
man discover the contradiction and exaggerate it--it is not I who
wish to exaggerate), well then, the real intention of the inviter
was to point out that sin is the destruction of mankind. Behold
now, that makes room, as the invitation also made room, almost
as if he had said _procul, o procul este profani_, or as if,
even though he had not said it, a voice had been heard which
thus interpreted the "come hither" of the invitation. There
surely are not many sufferers who will follow the invitation.
And even if there were one who, although aware that from this
inviter no actual wordily help was to be expected, nevertheless
had sought refuge with him, touched by his compassion: now even
he will flee from him. For is it not almost a bit of sharp practice
to profess to be here out of compassion, and then to speak about sin?

Indeed, it is a piece of cunning, unless you are altogether
certain that you are a sinner. If it is tooth-ache which bothers
you, or if your house is burned to the ground, but if it has
escaped you that you are a sinner--why, then it was cunning on
his part. It is a bit of sharp practice of him to assert: "I
heal all manner of disease," in order to say, when one approaches
him: "the fact is, I recognize only one disease, which is sin--of
that I shall cure all them 'that labor and are heavy laden,' all
them that labor to work themselves free of the power of sin, that
labor to resist the evil, and to vanquish their weakness, but
succeed only in being laden." Of this malady he cures "all"
persons; even if there were but a single one who turned to him
because of this malady: he heals all persons. But to come to
him on account of any other disease, and only because of that,
is about as useful as to look up an eye-doctor when you have
fractured your leg.




CHRISTIANITY AS THE ABSOLUTE; CONTEMPORANEOUSNESS WITH CHRIST


With its invitation to all "that labor and are heavy laden" Christianity
has entered the world, not--as the clergy whimperingly and falsely
introduce it--as a shining paragon of mild grounds of consolation;
but as the absolute. God wills it so because of His love, but it
is God who wills it, and He wills it as He wills it. He does not
choose to have His nature changed by man and become a nice, that
is to say, humane, God; but He chooses to change the nature
of man because of His love for them. Neither does He care to
hear any human impertinence concerning the why and wherefore
of Christianity, and why it entered the world: it is, and is
to be, the absolute. Therefore all the relative explanations
which may have been ventured as to its why and wherefore are
entirely beside the point. Possibly, these explanations were
suggested by a kind of human compassion which believes it necessary
to haggle a bit--God very likely does not know the nature of
man very well, His demands are a bit exorbitant, and therefore
the clergymen must haggle and beat Him down a bit.[24] Maybe
the clergy hit upon that idea in order to stand well with men
and reap some advantage from preaching the gospel; for if its
demands are reduced to the purely human, to the demands which
arise in man's heart, why, then men will of course think well
of it, and of course also of the amiable preacher who knows
how to make Christianity so mild--if the Apostles had been able
to do that the world would have esteemed them highly also in
their time. However, all this is the absolute. But what is it
good for, then--is it not a downright torment? Why, yes, you
may say so: from the standpoint of the relative, the absolute
is the greatest torment. In his dull, languid, sluggish moments,
when man is dominated by his sensual nature, Christianity is
an absurdity to him since it is not commensurable with any definite
"wherefore?" But of what use is it, then? Answer: peace! it is
the absolute. And thus it must be represented; that is, in a
fashion which makes it appear as an absurdity to the sensual
nature of man. And therefore is it, ah, so true and, in still
another sense, so true when the worldly-wise man who is contemporaneous
with Christ condemns him with the words: "he is literally nothing"--quite
true, for he is the absolute. And, being absolute, Christianity
has come in the world, not as a consolation in the human sense:
in fact, quite on the contrary, it is ever reminding one how
the Christian must suffer in order to become, or to remain, a
Christian--sufferings which he may, if you please, escape by
not electing to be a Christian.

There is, indeed, an unbridgeable gulf fixed between God and
man. It therefore became plain to those contemporary with Christ
that the process of becoming a Christian (that is, being changed
into the likeness of God) is, in a human sense, a greater torment
and wretchedness and pain than the greatest conceivable human
suffering, and moreover a crime in the eyes of one's contemporaries.
And thus will it always be; that is, if becoming a Christian in
reality means becoming contemporaneous with Christ. And if becoming
a Christian does not have that meaning, then all your chatter
about becoming a Christian is a vanity, a delusion and a snare,
and likewise a blasphemy and a sin against the Holy Ghost.

For with regard to the absolute there is but one time, viz. the
present. He who is not contemporaneous with the absolute, for
him it does not exist at all. And since Christ is the absolute,
it is evident that in respect of him there is but one situation:
contemporaneousness. The three, or seven, or fifteen, or seventeen,
or eighteen hundred years which have elapsed since his death do
not make the least difference, one way or the other. They neither
change him nor reveal, either, who he was; for his real nature
is revealed only to faith.

Christ, let me say so with the utmost seriousness, is not an
actor; neither is he a merely historical personage since, being
the paradox, he is an extremely unhistorical personage. But
precisely this is the difference between poetry and reality:
contemporaneousness.[25] The difference between poetry and history
is no doubt this, that history is what has really happened, and
poetry, what is possible, the action which is supposed to have
taken place, the life which has taken form in the poet's imagination.
But that which really happened (the past) is not necessarily
reality, except in a certain sense, viz., in contrast with poetry.
There is still lacking in it the criterion of truth (as inwardness)
and of all religion, there is still lacking the criterion: the
truth FOR YOU. That which is past is not a reality--for me,
but only my time is. That which you are contemporaneous with,
that is reality--for you. Thus every person has the choice to
be contemporaneous with the age in which he is living--and also
with one other period, with that of Christ's life here on earth;
for Christ's life on earth, or Sacred History, stands by itself,
outside of history.

History you may read and hear about as a matter of the past.
Within its realm you can, if you so care, judge actions by their
results. But in Christ's life here on earth there is nothing
past. It did not wait for the assistance of any subsequent results
in its own time, 1800 years ago; neither does it now. Historic
Christianity is sheer moonshine and un-Christian muddle-headedness.
For those true Christians who in every generation live a life
contemporaneous with that of Christ have nothing whatsoever to
do with Christians of the preceding generation, but all the
more with their contemporary, Christ. His life here on earth
attends every generation, and every generation severally, as
Sacred History; his life on earth is eternal contemporaneousness.
For this reason all learned lecturing about Christianity, which
has its haunt and hiding-place in the assumption that Christianity
is something which belongs to the past and to the 1800 years of
history, this lecturing is the most un-Christian of heresies,
as every one would readily recognize if he but tried to imagine
the generation contemporaneous with Christ as--lecturing! No,
we must ever keep in mind that every generation (of the faithful)
is contemporaneous with him.

If you cannot master yourself so as to make yourself contemporaneous
with him and thus become a Christian; or if he cannot, as your
contemporary, draw you to himself, then you will never be a
Christian. You may, if you please, honor, praise, thank, and
with all worldly goods reward, him who deludes you into thinking
that you are a Christian; nevertheless--he deceives you. You
may count yourself happy that you were not contemporaneous with
one who dared to assert this; or you may be exasperated to madness
by the torment, like that of the "gadfly,[26]" of being contemporaneous
with one who says this to your face: in the first case you are
deceived, whereas in the second you have at least had a chance
to hear the truth.

If you cannot bear this contemporaneousness, and not bear to see
this sight in reality--if you cannot prevail upon yourself to go
out into the street--and behold! it is God in that loathsome
procession; and if you cannot bear to think that this will be
your condition also if you kneel and worship him: then you are
not essentially a Christian. In that case, what you will have
to do is to admit the fact unconditionally to yourself, so that
you may, above all, preserve humility, and fear and trembling,
when contemplating what it means really to be a Christian. For
that way you must proceed, in order to learn and to practice
how to flee to grace, so that you will not seek it in vain; but
do not, for God's sake, go to any one to be "consoled." For to
be sure it is written: "blessed are the eyes which see the things
that ye see,[27]" which word the priests have on the tips of
their tongues--curiously enough; at times, perhaps, even to
defend a worldly finery which, if contemporary with Christ,
would be rather incongruous--as if these words had not been
said solely about those contemporaries of his who believed.
If his exaltation had been evident to the eyes so that every
one without any trouble could have beheld it, why then it would
be incorrect to say that Christ abased himself and assumed the
guise of a servant, and it would be superfluous to warn against
being offended in him; for why in the world should one take
offense in an exalted one arrayed in glory? And how in the world
will you explain it that Christ fared so ill and that everybody
failed to rush up admiringly to behold what was so plain? Ah no,
"he hath no form nor comeliness; and when we shall see him,
there is no beauty that we should desire him" (Isaiah 53, 2[28]);
and there was to all appearances nothing remarkable about him
who in lowly guise, and by performing signs and wonders, constantly
presented the possibility of offense, who claimed to be God--in
lowly guise; which therefore expresses: in the first place,
what God means by compassion, and by one's self needing to be
humble and poor if one wishes to be compassionate; and in the
second place, what God means by the misery of mankind. Which,
again, in both instances is extremely different from what men
mean by these things and which every generation, to the end
of time, has to learn over again from the beginning, and beginning
in every respect at the same point where those who were contemporary
with Christ had to start; that is, to practice these things
as contemporaries of Christ. Human impatience and unruliness
is, of course, of no avail whatsoever. No man will be able to
tell you in how far you may succeed in becoming essentially
a Christian. But neither will anxiety and fear and despair help
one. Sincerity toward God is the first and the last condition,
sincerity in confessing to one's self just where one stands,
sincerity before God in ever aiming at one's task. However slowly
one may proceed, and if it be but crawling--one is, at any rate,
in the right position and is not misled and deceived by the
trick of changing the nature of Christ who, instead of being
God, is thereby made to represent that sentimental compassion
which is man's own invention; by which men instead of being
lifted up to heaven by Christianity, are delayed on their way
and remain human and no more.




THE MORAL


"And what, then, does all this signify?" It signifies that every
one, in silent inwardness before God, is to feel humility before
what it means to be in the strictest sense a Christian; is to
confess sincerely before God what his position is, so that he
may worthily partake of the grace which is offered to every one
who is not perfect, that is, to every one. And it means no more
than that. For the rest let him attend to his work and find joy
in it, let him love his wife, rejoicing in her, let him raise his
children to be a joy to him, and let him love his fellow-men and
enjoy life. God will surely let him know if more is demanded of
him, and will also help him to accomplish it; for in the terrifying
language of the law this sounds so terrible because it would
seem as if man by his own strength were to hold fast to Christ,
whereas in the language of love it is Christ that holds fast
to him. As was said, then, God will surely let him know if more
is demanded of him. But what is demanded of every one is that he
humble himself in the presence of God under the demands of ideality.
And therefore these demands should be heard, and heard again and
again in all their absoluteness. To be a Christian has become
a matter of no importance whatever--a mummery, something one
is anyway, or something one acquires more readily than a trick.
In very truth, it is high time that the demands of ideality were
heard.

"But if being a Christian is something so terrifying and awesome,
how in all the world can a man get it into his head to wish to
accept Christianity?" Very simply and, if you so wish, quite
according to Luther: only the consciousness of sin, if I may
express myself so, can force one--from the other side, grace
exerts the attraction--can force one into this terror. And in
the same instant the Christian ideal is transformed, and is
sheer mildness, grace, love, and pity. Looking at it any other
way, however, Christianity is, and shall ever be, the greatest
absurdity, or else the greatest terror. Approach is had only
through the consciousness of sin, and to desire to enter by
any other way amounts to a crime of lse-majest against Christianity.

But sin, or the fact that you and I, individually, are sinners,
has at present either been done away with, or else the demands
have been lowered in an unjustifiable manner, both in life--the
domestic, the civic, as well as the ecclesiastic--and in science
which has invented the new doctrine of sin in general. As an
equivalent, one has hit upon the device of helping men into
Christianity, and keeping them in it, by the aid of a knowledge
of world-historic events, of that mild teaching, the exalted
and profound spirit of it, about Christ as a friend, etc., etc.--all
of which Luther would have called stuff and nonsense and which
is really blasphemy, aiming as it does at fraternizing impudently
with God and with Christ.

Only the consciousness of being a sinner can inspire one with
absolute respect for Christianity. And just because Christianity
demands absolute respect it must and shall, to any other way of
looking at it, seem absurdity or terror; just because only thereby
can the qualitative and absolute emphasis fall on the fact that
it is only the consciousness of being a sinner which will procure
entrance into it, and at the same time give the vision which,
being absolute respect, enables one to see the mildness and love
and compassion of Christianity.

The poor in spirit who acknowledge themselves to be sinners,
they do not need to know the least thing about the difficulties
which appear when one is neither simple nor humble-minded. But
when this humble consciousness of one's self, i. e., the individual's,
being a sinner is lacking--aye, even though one possessed all
human ingenuity and wisdom, and had all accomplishments possible
to man: it will profit him little. Christianity will in the same
degree rise terrifying before him and transform itself into
absurdity or terror; until he learns, either to renounce it,
or else, by the help of what is nothing less than scientific
propdeutics, apologetics, etc., that is, through the torments
of a contrite heart, to enter into Christianity by the narrow
path, through the consciousness of sin.


[Footnote 1: First Part; comprising about one-fourth of the whole book.]

[Footnote 2: I. e. Christ; _cf._ Introduction for the use of small
letters.]

[Footnote 3: Socrates.]

[Footnote 4: John I, 1.]

[Footnote 5: Matthew 20, 15.]

[Footnote 6: Luke 11, 14.]

[Footnote 7: Kierkegaard's note: by history we mean here profane history,
world history, history as such, as against Sacred History.]

[Footnote 8: _Cf._ the claim of the Pharisees, Matth. 23, 30: "If we
had been in the days of our fathers, we would not have been partakers
with them in the blood of the prophets."]

[Footnote 9: One is here irresistibly reminded of passages in Ibsen's
"Brand," e. g., Brand's conversation with Einar, in Act I. _Cf._ also
"The invitation and the inviter" and Introduction]

[Footnote 10: Matthew 11, 6.]

[Footnote 11: Luke 18, 32.]

[Footnote 12: Matthew 20, 27f.]

[Footnote 13: The original here does not agree with the sense of the
passage.]

[Footnote 14: Bjrnson's play of "Beyond Human Power," Part I, Act 2,
reads like an elaboration of these views.]

[Footnote 15: Matthew 9, 16.]

[Footnote 16: The following passage is capable of different
interpretations in the original.]

[Footnote 17: Matthew 14, 17.]

[Footnote 18: _Cf._ 1 Cor. 2, 9.]

[Footnote 19: John 3, 1f.]

[Footnote 20: Luke 23, 35.]

[Footnote 21: John 2, 4, etc.]

[Footnote 22: The passage is not quite clear. Probably, you will not be
the man to explain this phenomenon in the very opposite terms, viz., as
the divinity himself.]

[Footnote 23: Here, the unreserved identification with human suffering
above referred to.]

[Footnote 24: _Cf._ Footnote 8, in "The Misfortune of Christendom."]

[Footnote 25: As my friend, H. M. Jones, points out, the following passage
is essentially Aristotelian: "The true difference is that one (history)
relates what has happened, the other (poetry) what may happen";
"Poetics," Chap. IX.]

[Footnote 26: _Cf._ Plato's "Apologia" where Socrates is made to say of
himself that he is inflicted on the Athenians like a gadfly on a horse,
in order to keep them awake.]

[Footnote 27: Luke 10, 23.]

[Footnote 28: Kierkegaard's own note.]
