The most common form of despair is not being who you are.
Life can only be understood backwards; but it must be lived forwards.
People demand freedom of speech as a compensation for the freedom of thought which they seldom use.
There are two ways to be fooled. One is to believe what isn't true; the other is to refuse to believe what is true.
Anxiety is the dizziness of freedom.
To dare is to lose one's footing momentarily. Not to dare is to lose oneself.
Truth always rests with the minority, and the minority is always stronger than the majority, because the minority is generally formed by those who really have an opinion, while the strength of a majority is illusory, formed by the gangs who have no opinion—and who, therefore, in the next instant (when it is evident that the minority is the stronger) assume its opinion, which then becomes that of the majority, i.e., becomes nonsense by having the whole [mass] on its side, while Truth again reverts to a new minority.
Face to face with God there is no longer any public.
It is perfectly true, as philosophers say, that life must be understood backwards. But they forget the other proposition, that it must be lived forwards.
The highest and most beautiful things in life are not to be heard about, nor read about, nor seen; but, if one will, are to be lived.
Boredom is the root of all evil – the despairing refusal to be oneself.
The function of prayer is not to influence God, but rather to change the nature of the one who prays.
Love is the expression of the one who loves, not of the one who is loved. Those who think they can love only the people they prefer do not love at all. Love discovers truths about individuals that others cannot see.
Deep within every human being there still lives the anxiety over the possibility of being alone in the world, forgotten by God, overlooked among the millions and millions in this enormous household. One keeps this anxiety at a distance by looking at the many round about who are related to him as kin and friends, but the anxiety is still there, nevertheless, and one hardly dares think of what would happen if all this were taken away.
If anyone on the verge of action should judge himself according to the outcome, he would never begin.
A fire broke out backstage in a theatre. The clown came out to warn the public; they thought it was a joke and applauded. He repeated it; the acclaim was even greater. I think that's just how the world will come to an end: to general applause from wits who believe it's a joke.
What is a poet? An unhappy man who hides deep anguish in his heart, but whose lips are so formed that when the sigh and cry pass through them, it sounds like lovely music.
Listen to the cry of a woman in labor at the hour of giving birth — look at the dying man’s struggle at his last extremity, and then tell me whether something that begins and ends thus could be intended for enjoyment.
I see it all perfectly; there are two possible situations — one can either do this or that. My honest opinion and my friendly advice is this: do it or do not do it — you will regret both.
