The sickness unto death is despair.

Despair is a sickness in the spirit, in the self, and so it may assume a triple form: in despair at not being conscious of having a self (despair improperly so called); in despair at not willing to be oneself; in despair at willing to be oneself.

The human being is spirit. But what is spirit? Spirit is the self. But what is the self? The self is a relation that relates itself to itself or is the relation's relating itself to itself in the relation; the self is not the relation but that the relation relates itself to itself. A human being is a synthesis of the infinite and the finite, of the temporal and the eternal, of freedom and necessity, in short, a synthesis. A synthesis is a relation between two. Considered in this way, a human being is still not a self.

In the relation between two, the relation is the third as a negative unity, and the two relate to the relation and in the relation to the relation; thus under the qualification of the psychical the relation between the psychical and the physical is a relation. If, on the contrary, the relation relates itself to itself, this relation is the positive third, and this is the self.

Such a relation that relates itself to itself, a self, must either have established itself or have been established by another. If the relation that relates itself to itself has been established by another, then the relation is indeed the third, but this relation, the third, is yet again a relation and relates itself to that which established the whole relation. Such a derived, established relation is the human self, a relation that relates itself to itself and in relating itself to itself relates itself to another.

This is why there can be two forms of despair in the strict sense. If a human self had itself established itself, then there could be only one form: not to will to be oneself, to will to get rid of oneself, but there could be no question of despairingly willing to be oneself. This formula is the expression for the total dependence of the relation (the self), the expression for the fact that the self cannot of itself arrive at or remain in equilibrium and rest by itself, but only, in relating itself to itself, by relating itself to that which established the whole relation.

Despair is the sickness unto death. The concept of the sickness unto death must be understood, however, in a peculiar sense. Literally it means a sickness the end and outcome of which is death. Thus one speaks of a mortal sickness as synonymous with a sickness unto death. But in a Christian sense death is by no means the last thing of all, hence it is by no means a sickness unto death.

But despair is precisely the sickness, not to be able to die. So it has much in common with the situation of the dying man (in the ordinary sense) when he lies and struggles with death and cannot die. Thus to be sick unto death is, not to be able to die—yet not as though there were hope of life; no, the hopelessness in this case is that even the last hope, death, is not available. When death is the greatest danger, one hopes for life; but when one becomes acquainted with an even more dreadful danger, one hopes for death. So when the danger is so great that death has become one's hope, despair is the disconsolateness of not being able to die.
