The Ethics of Aristotle is one half of a single treatise of which his
   Politics is the other half. Both deal with one and the same subject.
   This subject is what Aristotle calls in one place the “philosophy of
   human affairs;” but more frequently Political or Social Science. In the
   two works taken together we have their author’s whole theory of human
   conduct or practical activity, that is, of all human activity which is
   not directed merely to knowledge or truth. The two parts of this
   treatise are mutually complementary, but in a literary sense each is
   independent and self-contained. The proem to the Ethics is an
   introduction to the whole subject, not merely to the first part; the
   last chapter of the Ethics points forward to the Politics, and sketches
   for that part of the treatise the order of enquiry to be pursued (an
   order which in the actual treatise is not adhered to).

   The principle of distribution of the subject-matter between the two
   works is far from obvious, and has been much debated. Not much can be
   gathered from their titles, which in any case were not given to them by
   their author. Nor do these titles suggest any very compact unity in the
   works to which they are applied: the plural forms, which survive so
   oddly in English (Ethics, Politics), were intended to indicate the
   treatment within a single work of a group of connected questions. The
   unity of the first group arises from their centring round the topic of
   character, that of the second from their connection with the existence
   and life of the city or state. We have thus to regard the Ethics as
   dealing with one group of problems and the Politics with a second, both
   falling within the wide compass of Political Science. Each of these
   groups falls into sub-groups which roughly correspond to the several
   books in each work. The tendency to take up one by one the various
   problems which had suggested themselves in the wide field obscures both
   the unity of the subject-matter and its proper articulation. But it is
   to be remembered that what is offered us is avowedly rather an enquiry
   than an exposition of hard and fast doctrine.

   Nevertheless each work aims at a relative completeness, and it is
   important to observe the relation of each to the other. The distinction
   is not that the one treats of Moral and the other of Political
   Philosophy, nor again that the one deals with the moral activity of the
   individual and the other with that of the State, nor once more that the
   one gives us the theory of human conduct, while the other discusses its
   application in practice, though not all of these misinterpretations are
   equally erroneous. The clue to the right interpretation is given by
   Aristotle himself, where in the last chapter of the Ethics he is paving
   the way for the Politics. In the Ethics he has not confined himself to
   the abstract or isolated individual, but has always thought of him, or
   we might say, in his social and political context, with a given nature
   due to race and heredity and in certain surroundings. So viewing him he
   has studied the nature and formation of his character—all that he can
   make himself or be made by others to be. Especially he has investigated
   the various admirable forms of human character and the mode of their
   production. But all this, though it brings more clearly before us what
   goodness or virtue is, and how it is to be reached, remains mere theory
   or talk. By itself it does not enable us to become, or to help others
   to become, good. For this it is necessary to bring into play the great
   force of the Political Community or State, of which the main instrument
   is Law. Hence arises the demand for the necessary complement to the
   Ethics, i.e., a treatise devoted to the questions which centre round
   the enquiry; by what organisation of social or political forces, by
   what laws or institutions can we best secure the greatest amount of
   good character?

   We must, however, remember that the production of good character is not
   the end of either individual or state action: that is the aim of the
   one and the other because good character is the indispensable condition
   and chief determinant of happiness, itself the goal of all human doing.
   The end of all action, individual or collective, is the greatest
   happiness of the greatest number. There is, Aristotle insists, no
   difference of kind between the good of one and the good of many or all.
   The sole difference is one of amount or scale. This does not mean
   simply that the State exists to secure in larger measure the objects of
   degree which the isolated individual attempts, but is too feeble, to
   secure without it. On the contrary, it rather insists that whatever
   goods society alone enables a man to secure have always had to the
   individual—whether he realised it or not—the value which, when so
   secured, he recognises them to possess. The best and happiest life for
   the individual is that which the State renders possible, and this it
   does mainly by revealing to him the value of new objects of desire and
   educating him to appreciate them. To Aristotle or to Plato the State
   is, above all, a large and powerful educative agency which gives the
   individual increased opportunities of self-development and greater
   capacities for the enjoyment of life.

   Looking forward, then, to the life of the State as that which aids
   support, and combines the efforts of the individual to obtain
   happiness, Aristotle draws no hard and fast distinction between the
   spheres of action of Man as individual and Man as citizen. Nor does the
   division of his discussion into the Ethics and the Politics rest upon
   any such distinction. The distinction implied is rather between two
   stages in the life of the civilised man—the stage of preparation for
   the full life of the adult citizen, and the stage of the actual
   exercise or enjoyment of citizenship. Hence the Ethics, where his
   attention is directed upon the formation of character, is largely and
   centrally a treatise on Moral Education. It discusses especially those
   admirable human qualities which fit a man for life in an organised
   civic community, which makes him “a good citizen,” and considers how
   they can be fostered or created and their opposites prevented.

   This is the kernel of the Ethics, and all the rest is subordinate to
   this main interest and purpose. Yet “the rest” is not irrelevant; the
   whole situation in which character grows and operates is concretely
   conceived. There is a basis of what we should call Psychology, sketched
   in firm outlines, the deeper presuppositions and the wider issues of
   human character and conduct are not ignored, and there is no little of
   what we should call Metaphysics. But neither the Psychology nor the
   Metaphysics is elaborated, and only so much is brought forward as
   appears necessary to put the main facts in their proper perspective and
   setting. It is this combination of width of outlook with close
   observation of the concrete facts of conduct which gives its abiding
   value to the work, and justifies the view of it as containing
   Aristotle’s Moral Philosophy. Nor is it important merely as summing up
   the moral judgments and speculations of an age now long past. It seizes
   and dwells upon those elements and features in human practice which are
   most essential and permanent, and it is small wonder that so much in it
   survives in our own ways of regarding conduct and speaking of it. Thus
   it still remains one of the classics of Moral Philosophy, nor is its
   value likely soon to be exhausted.

   As was pointed out above, the proem (Book I., cc. i-iii.) is a prelude
   to the treatment of the whole subject covered by the Ethics and the
   Politics together. It sets forth the purpose of the enquiry, describes
   the spirit in which it is to be undertaken and what ought to be the
   expectation of the reader, and lastly states the necessary conditions
   of studying it with profit. The aim of it is the acquisition and
   propagation of a certain kind of knowledge (science), but this
   knowledge and the thinking which brings it about are subsidiary to a
   practical end. The knowledge aimed at is of what is best for man and of
   the conditions of its realisation. Such knowledge is that which in its
   consumate form we find in great statesmen, enabling them to organise
   and administer their states and regulate by law the life of the
   citizens to their advantage and happiness, but it is the same kind of
   knowledge which on a smaller scale secures success in the management of
   the family or of private life.

   It is characteristic of such knowledge that it should be deficient in
   “exactness,” in precision of statement, and closeness of logical
   concatenation. We must not look for a mathematics of conduct. The
   subject-matter of Human Conduct is not governed by necessary and
   uniform laws. But this does not mean that it is subject to no laws.
   There are general principles at work in it, and these can be formulated
   in “rules,” which rules can be systematised or unified. It is
   all-important to remember that practical or moral rules are only
   general and always admit of exceptions, and that they arise not from
   the mere complexity of the facts, but from the liability of the facts
   to a certain unpredictable variation. At their very best, practical
   rules state probabilities, not certainties; a relative constancy of
   connection is all that exists, but it is enough to serve as a guide in
   life. Aristotle here holds the balance between a misleading hope of
   reducing the subject-matter of conduct to a few simple rigorous
   abstract principles, with conclusions necessarily issuing from them,
   and the view that it is the field of operation of inscrutable forces
   acting without predictable regularity. He does not pretend to find in
   it absolute uniformities, or to deduce the details from his principles.
   Hence, too, he insists on the necessity of experience as the source or
   test of all that he has to say. Moral experience—the actual possession
   and exercise of good character—is necessary truly to understand moral
   principles and profitably to apply them. The mere intellectual
   apprehension of them is not possible, or if possible, profitless.

   The Ethics is addressed to students who are presumed both to have
   enough general education to appreciate these points, and also to have a
   solid foundation of good habits. More than that is not required for the
   profitable study of it.

   If the discussion of the nature and formation of character be regarded
   as the central topic of the Ethics, the contents of Book I., cc.
   iv.-xii. may be considered as still belonging to the introduction and
   setting, but these chapters contain matter of profound importance and
   have exercised an enormous influence upon subsequent thought. They lay
   down a principle which governs all Greek thought about human life, viz.
   that it is only intelligible when viewed as directed towards some end
   or good. This is the Greek way of expressing that all human life
   involves an ideal element—something which it is not yet and which under
   certain conditions it is to be. In that sense Greek Moral Philosophy is
   essentially idealistic. Further it is always assumed that all human
   practical activity is directed or “oriented” to a single end, and that
   that end is knowable or definable in advance of its realisation. To
   know it is not merely a matter of speculative interest, it is of the
   highest practical moment for only in the light of it can life be duly
   guided, and particularly only so can the state be properly organised
   and administered. This explains the stress laid throughout by Greek
   Moral Philosophy upon the necessity of knowledge as a condition of the
   best life. This knowledge is not, though it includes knowledge of the
   nature of man and his circumstances, it is knowledge of what is best—of
   man’s supreme end or good.

   But this end is not conceived as presented to him by a superior power
   nor even as something which ought to be. The presentation of the Moral
   Ideal as Duty is almost absent. From the outset it is identified with
   the object of desire, of what we not merely judge desirable but
   actually do desire, or that which would, if realised, satisfy human
   desire. In fact it is what we all, wise and simple, agree in naming
   “Happiness” (Welfare or Well-being)

   In what then does happiness consist? Aristotle summarily sets aside the
   more or less popular identifications of it with abundance of physical
   pleasures, with political power and honour, with the mere possession of
   such superior gifts or attainments as normally entitle men to these,
   with wealth. None of these can constitute the end or good of man as
   such. On the other hand, he rejects his master Plato’s conception of a
   good which is the end of the whole universe, or at least dismisses it
   as irrelevant to his present enquiry. The good towards which all human
   desires and practical activities are directed must be one conformable
   to man’s special nature and circumstances and attainable by his
   efforts. There is in Aristotle’s theory of human conduct no trace of
   Plato’s “other worldliness”, he brings the moral ideal in Bacon’s
   phrase down to “right earth”—and so closer to the facts and problems of
   actual human living. Turning from criticism of others he states his own
   positive view of Happiness, and, though he avowedly states it merely in
   outline his account is pregnant with significance. Human Happiness lies
   in activity or energising, and that in a way peculiar to man with his
   given nature and his given circumstances, it is not theoretical, but
   practical: it is the activity not of reason but still of a being who
   possesses reason and applies it, and it presupposes in that being the
   development, and not merely the natural possession, of certain relevant
   powers and capacities. The last is the prime condition of successful
   living and therefore of satisfaction, but Aristotle does not ignore
   other conditions, such as length of life, wealth and good luck, the
   absence or diminution of which render happiness not impossible, but
   difficult of attainment.

   It is interesting to compare this account of Happiness with Mill’s in
   Utilitarianism. Mill’s is much the less consistent: at times he
   distinguishes and at times he identifies, happiness, pleasure,
   contentment, and satisfaction. He wavers between belief in its general
   attainability and an absence of hopefulness. He mixes up in an
   arbitrary way such ingredients as “not expecting more from life than it
   is capable of bestowing,” “mental cultivation,” “improved laws,” etc.,
   and in fact leaves the whole conception vague, blurred, and uncertain.
   Aristotle draws the outline with a firmer hand and presents a more
   definite ideal. He allows for the influence on happiness of conditions
   only partly, if at all, within the control of man, but he clearly makes
   the man positive determinant of man’s happiness he in himself, and more
   particularly in what he makes directly of his own nature, and so
   indirectly of his circumstances. “‘Tis in ourselves that we are thus or
   thus” But once more this does not involve an artificial or abstract
   isolation of the individual moral agent from his relation to other
   persons or things from his context in society and nature, nor ignore
   the relative dependence of his life upon a favourable environment.

   The main factor which determines success or failure in human life is
   the acquisition of certain powers, for Happiness is just the exercise
   or putting forth of these in actual living, everything else is
   secondary and subordinate. These powers arise from the due development
   of certain natural aptitudes which belong (in various degrees) to human
   nature as such and therefore to all normal human beings. In their
   developed form they are known as virtues (the Greek means simply
   “goodnesses,” “perfections,” “excellences,” or “fitnesses”), some of
   them are physical, but others are psychical, and among the latter some,
   and these distinctively or peculiarly human, are “rational,” i e,
   presuppose the possession and exercise of mind or intelligence. These
   last fall into two groups, which Aristotle distinguishes as Goodnesses
   of Intellect and Goodnesses of Character. They have in common that they
   all excite in us admiration and praise of their possessors, and that
   they are not natural endowments, but acquired characteristics But they
   differ in important ways. (1) the former are excellences or developed
   powers of the reason as such—of that in us which sees and formulates
   laws, rules, regularities systems, and is content in the vision of
   them, while the latter involve a submission or obedience to such rules
   of something in us which is in itself capricious and irregular, but
   capable of regulation, viz our instincts and feelings, (2) the former
   are acquired by study and instruction, the latter by discipline. The
   latter constitute “character,” each of them as a “moral virtue”
   (literally “a goodness of character”), and upon them primarily depends
   the realisation of happiness. This is the case at least for the great
   majority of men, and for all men their possession is an indispensable
   basis of the best, i e, the most desirable life. They form the chief or
   central subject-matter of the Ethics.

   Perhaps the truest way of conceiving Aristotle’s meaning here is to
   regard a moral virtue as a form of obedience to a maxim or rule of
   conduct accepted by the agent as valid for a class of recurrent
   situations in human life. Such obedience requires knowledge of the rule
   and acceptance of it as the rule of the agent’s own actions, but not
   necessarily knowledge of its ground or of its systematic connexion with
   other similarly known and similarly accepted rules (It may be remarked
   that the Greek word usually translated “reason,” means in almost all
   cases in the Ethics such a rule, and not the faculty which apprehends,
   formulates, considers them).

   The “moral virtues and vices” make up what we call character, and the
   important questions arise: (1) What is character? and (2) How is it
   formed? (for character in this sense is not a natural endowment; it is
   formed or produced). Aristotle deals with these questions in the
   reverse order. His answers are peculiar and distinctive—not that they
   are absolutely novel (for they are anticipated in Plato), but that by
   him they are for the first time distinctly and clearly formulated.

   (1.) Character, good or bad, is produced by what Aristotle calls
   “habituation,” that is, it is the result of the repeated doing of acts
   which have a similar or common quality. Such repetition acting upon
   natural aptitudes or propensities gradually fixes them in one or other
   of two opposite directions, giving them a bias towards good or evil.
   Hence the several acts which determine goodness or badness of character
   must be done in a certain way, and thus the formation of good character
   requires discipline and direction from without. Not that the agent
   himself contributes nothing to the formation of his character, but that
   at first he needs guidance. The point is not so much that the process
   cannot be safely left to Nature, but that it cannot be entrusted to
   merely intellectual instruction. The process is one of assimilation,
   largely by imitation and under direction and control. The result is a
   growing understanding of what is done, a choice of it for its own sake,
   a fixity and steadiness of purpose. Right acts and feelings become,
   through habit, easier and more pleasant, and the doing of them a
   “second nature.” The agent acquires the power of doing them freely,
   willingly, more and more “of himself.”

   But what are “right” acts? In the first place, they are those that
   conform to a rule—to the right rule, and ultimately to reason. The
   Greeks never waver from the conviction that in the end moral conduct is
   essentially reasonable conduct. But there is a more significant way of
   describing their “rightness,” and here for the first time Aristotle
   introduces his famous “Doctrine of the Mean.” Reasoning from the
   analogy of “right” physical acts, he pronounces that rightness always
   means adaptation or adjustment to the special requirements of a
   situation. To this adjustment he gives a quantitative interpretation.
   To do (or to feel) what is right in a given situation is to do or to
   feel just the amount required—neither more nor less: to do wrong is to
   do or to feel too much or too little—to fall short of or over-shoot, “a
   mean” determined by the situation. The repetition of acts which lie in
   the mean is the cause of the formation of each and every “goodness of
   character,” and for this “rules” can be given.

   (2) What then is a “moral virtue,” the result of such a process duly
   directed? It is no mere mood of feeling, no mere liability to emotion,
   no mere natural aptitude or endowment, it is a permanent state of the
   agent’s self, or, as we might in modern phrase put it, of his will, it
   consists in a steady self-imposed obedience to a rule of action in
   certain situations which frequently recur in human life. The rule
   prescribes the control and regulation within limits of the agent’s
   natural impulses to act and feel thus and thus. The situations fall
   into groups which constitute the “fields” of the several “moral
   virtues”, for each there is a rule, conformity to which secures
   rightness in the individual acts. Thus the moral ideal appears as a
   code of rules, accepted by the agent, but as yet to him without
   rational justification and without system or unity. But the rules
   prescribe no mechanical uniformity: each within its limits permits
   variety, and the exactly right amount adopted to the requirements of
   the individual situation (and every actual situation is individual)
   must be determined by the intuition of the moment. There is no attempt
   to reduce the rich possibilities of right action to a single monotonous
   type. On the contrary, there are acknowledged to be many forms of moral
   virtue, and there is a long list of them, with their correlative vices
   enumerated.

   The Doctrine of the Mean here takes a form in which it has impressed
   subsequent thinkers, but which has less importance than is usually
   ascribed to it. In the “Table of the Virtues and Vices,” each of the
   virtues is flanked by two opposite vices, which are respectively the
   excess and defect of that which in due measure constitutes the virtue.
   Aristotle tries to show that this is the case in regard to every virtue
   named and recognised as such, but his treatment is often forced and the
   endeavour is not very successful. Except as a convenient principle of
   arrangement of the various forms of praiseworthy or blameworthy
   characters, generally acknowledged as such by Greek opinion, this form
   of the doctrine is of no great significance.

   Books III-V are occupied with a survey of the moral virtues and vices.
   These seem to have been undertaken in order to verify in detail the
   general account, but this aim is not kept steadily in view. Nor is
   there any well-considered principle of classification. What we find is
   a sort of portrait-gallery of the various types of moral excellence
   which the Greeks of the author’s age admired and strove to encourage.
   The discussion is full of acute, interesting and sometimes profound
   observations. Some of the types are those which are and will be admired
   at all times, but others are connected with peculiar features of Greek
   life which have now passed away. The most important is that of Justice
   or the Just Man, to which we may later return. But the discussion is
   preceded by an attempt to elucidate some difficult and obscure points
   in the general account of moral virtue and action (Book III, cc i-v).
   This section is concerned with the notion of Responsibility. The
   discussion designedly excludes what we may call the metaphysical issues
   of the problem, which here present themselves, it moves on the level of
   thought of the practical man, the statesman, and the legislator.
   Coercion and ignorance of relevant circumstances render acts
   involuntary and exempt their doer from responsibility, otherwise the
   act is voluntary and the agent responsible, choice or preference of
   what is done, and inner consent to the deed, are to be presumed.
   Neither passion nor ignorance of the right rule can extenuate
   responsibility. But there is a difference between acts done voluntarily
   and acts done of set choice or purpose. The latter imply Deliberation.
   Deliberation involves thinking, thinking out means to ends: in
   deliberate acts the whole nature of the agent consents to and enters
   into the act, and in a peculiar sense they are his, they are him in
   action, and the most significant evidence of what he is. Aristotle is
   unable wholly to avoid allusion to the metaphysical difficulties and
   what he does here say upon them is obscure and unsatisfactory. But he
   insists upon the importance in moral action of the agent’s inner
   consent, and on the reality of his individual responsibility. For his
   present purpose the metaphysical difficulties are irrelevant.

   The treatment of Justice in Book V has always been a source of great
   difficulty to students of the Ethics. Almost more than any other part
   of the work it has exercised influence upon mediaeval and modern
   thought upon the subject. The distinctions and divisions have become
   part of the stock-in-trade of would be philosophic jurists. And yet,
   oddly enough, most of these distinctions have been misunderstood and
   the whole purport of the discussion misconceived. Aristotle is here
   dealing with justice in a restricted sense viz as that special goodness
   of character which is required of every adult citizen and which can be
   produced by early discipline or habituation. It is the temper or
   habitual attitude demanded of the citizen for the due exercise of his
   functions as taking part in the administration of the civic
   community—as a member of the judicature and executive. The Greek
   citizen was only exceptionally, and at rare intervals if ever, a
   law-maker while at any moment he might be called upon to act as a judge
   (juryman or arbitrator) or as an administrator. For the work of a
   legislator far more than the moral virtue of justice or fairmindedness
   was necessary, these were requisite to the rarer and higher
   “intellectual virtue” of practical wisdom. Then here, too, the
   discussion moves on a low level, and the raising of fundamental
   problems is excluded. Hence “distributive justice” is concerned not
   with the large question of the distribution of political power and
   privileges among the constituent members or classes of the state but
   with the smaller questions of the distribution among those of casual
   gains and even with the division among private claimants of a common
   fund or inheritance, while “corrective justice” is concerned solely
   with the management of legal redress. The whole treatment is confused
   by the unhappy attempt to give a precise mathematical form to the
   principles of justice in the various fields distinguished. Still it
   remains an interesting first endeavour to give greater exactness to
   some of the leading conceptions of jurisprudence.

   Book VI appears to have in view two aims: (1) to describe goodness of
   intellect and discover its highest form or forms; (2) to show how this
   is related to goodness of character, and so to conduct generally. As
   all thinking is either theoretical or practical, goodness of intellect
   has two supreme forms—Theoretical and Practical Wisdom. The first,
   which apprehends the eternal laws of the universe, has no direct
   relation to human conduct: the second is identical with that master
   science of human life of which the whole treatise, consisting of the
   Ethics and the Politics, is an exposition. It is this science which
   supplies the right rules of conduct Taking them as they emerge in and
   from practical experience, it formulates them more precisely and
   organises them into a system where they are all seen to converge upon
   happiness. The mode in which such knowledge manifests itself is in the
   power to show that such and such rules of action follow from the very
   nature of the end or good for man. It presupposes and starts from a
   clear conception of the end and the wish for it as conceived, and it
   proceeds by a deduction which is dehberation writ large. In the man of
   practical wisdom this process has reached its perfect result, and the
   code of right rules is apprehended as a system with a single principle
   and so as something wholly rational or reasonable He has not on each
   occasion to seek and find the right rule applicable to the situation,
   he produces it at once from within himself, and can at need justify it
   by exhibiting its rationale, i.e. , its connection with the end. This
   is the consummate form of reason applied to conduct, but there are
   minor forms of it, less independent or original, but nevertheless of
   great value, such as the power to think out the proper cause of policy
   in novel circumstances or the power to see the proper line of treatment
   to follow in a court of law.

   The form of the thinking which enters into conduct is that which
   terminates in the production of a rule which declares some means to the
   end of life. The process presupposes (a) a clear and just apprehension
   of the nature of that end—such as the Ethics itself endeavours to
   supply; (b) a correct perception of the conditions of action, (a) at
   least is impossible except to a man whose character has been duly
   formed by discipline; it arises only in a man who has acquired moral
   virtue. For such action and feeling as forms bad character, blinds the
   eye of the soul and corrupts the moral principle, and the place of
   practical wisdom is taken by that parody of itself which Aristotle
   calls “cleverness”—the “wisdom” of the unscrupulous man of the world.
   Thus true practical wisdom and true goodness of character are
   interdependent; neither is genuinely possible or “completely” present
   without the other. This is Aristotle’s contribution to the discussion
   of the question, so central in Greek Moral Philosophy, of the relation
   of the intellectual and the passionate factors in conduct.

   Aristotle is not an intuitionist, but he recognises the implication in
   conduct of a direct and immediate apprehension both of the end and of
   the character of his circumstances under which it is from moment to
   moment realised. The directness of such apprehension makes it analogous
   to sensation or sense-perception; but it is on his view in the end due
   to the existence or activity in man of that power in him which is the
   highest thing in his nature, and akin to or identical with the divine
   nature—mind, or intelligence. It is this which reveals to us what is
   best for us—the ideal of a happiness which is the object of our real
   wish and the goal of all our efforts. But beyond and above the
   practical ideal of what is best for man begins to show itself another
   and still higher ideal—that of a life not distinctively human or in a
   narrow sense practical, yet capable of being participated in by man
   even under the actual circumstances of this world. For a time, however,
   this further and higher ideal is ignored.

   The next book (Book VII.), is concerned partly with moral conditions,
   in which the agent seems to rise above the level of moral virtue or
   fall below that of moral vice, but partly and more largely with
   conditions in which the agent occupies a middle position between the
   two. Aristotle’s attention is here directed chiefly towards the
   phenomena of “Incontinence,” weakness of will or imperfect
   self-control. This condition was to the Greeks a matter of only too
   frequent experience, but it appeared to them peculiarly difficult to
   understand. How can a man know what is good or best for him, and yet
   chronically fail to act upon his knowledge? Socrates was driven to the
   paradox of denying the possibility, but the facts are too strong for
   him. Knowledge of the right rule may be present, nay the rightfulness
   of its authority may be acknowledged, and yet time after time it may be
   disobeyed; the will may be good and yet overmastered by the force of
   desire, so that the act done is contrary to the agent’s will.
   Nevertheless the act may be the agent’s, and the will therefore divided
   against itself. Aristotle is aware of the seriousness and difficulty of
   the problem, but in spite of the vividness with which he pictures, and
   the acuteness with which he analyses, the situation in which such
   action occurs, it cannot be said that he solves the problem. It is time
   that he rises above the abstract view of it as a conflict between
   reason and passion, recognising that passion is involved in the
   knowledge which in conduct prevails or is overborne, and that the force
   which leads to the wrong act is not blind or ignorant passion, but
   always has some reason in it. But he tends to lapse back into the
   abstraction, and his final account is perplexed and obscure. He finds
   the source of the phenomenon in the nature of the desire for bodily
   pleasures, which is not irrational but has something rational in it.
   Such pleasures are not necessarily or inherently bad, as has sometimes
   been maintained; on the contrary, they are good, but only in certain
   amounts or under certain conditions, so that the will is often misled,
   hesitates, and is lost.

   Books VIII. and IX. (on Friendship) are almost an interruption of the
   argument. The subject-matter of them was a favourite topic of ancient
   writers, and the treatment is smoother and more orderly than elsewhere
   in the Ethics. The argument is clear, and may be left without comment
   to the readers. These books contain a necessary and attractive
   complement to the somewhat dry account of Greek morality in the
   preceding books, and there are in them profound reflections on what may
   be called the metaphysics of friendship or love.

   At the beginning of Book X. we return to the topic of Pleasure, which
   is now regarded from a different point of view. In Book VII. the
   antagonists were those who over-emphasised the irrationality or badness
   of Pleasure: here it is rather those who so exaggerate its value as to
   confuse or identify it with the good or Happiness. But there is offered
   us in this section much more than criticism of the errors of others.
   Answers are given both to the psychological question, “What is
   Pleasure?” and to the ethical question, “What is its value?” Pleasure,
   we are told, is the natural concomitant and index of perfect activity,
   distinguishable but inseparable from it—“the activity of a subject at
   its best acting upon an object at its best.” It is therefore always and
   in itself a good, but its value rises and falls with that of the
   activity with which it is conjoined, and which it intensifies and
   perfects. Hence it follows that the highest and best pleasures are
   those which accompany the highest and best activity.

   Pleasure is, therefore, a necessary element in the best life, but it is
   not the whole of it nor the principal ingredient. The value of a life
   depends upon the nature and worth of the activity which it involves;
   given the maximum of full free action, the maximum of pleasure
   necessary follows. But on what sort of life is such activity possible?
   This leads us back to the question, What is happiness? In what life can
   man find the fullest satisfaction for his desires? To this question
   Aristotle gives an answer which cannot but surprise us after what has
   preceded. True Happiness, great satisfaction, cannot be found by man in
   any form of “practical” life, no, not in the fullest and freest
   exercise possible of the “moral virtues,” not in the life of the
   citizen or of the great soldier or statesman. To seek it there is to
   court failure and disappointment. It is to be found in the life of the
   onlooker, the disinterested spectator; or, to put it more distinctly,
   “in the life of the philosopher, the life of scientific and philosophic
   contemplation.” The highest and most satisfying form of life possible
   to man is “the contemplative life”; it is only in a secondary sense and
   for those incapable of their life, that the practical or moral ideal is
   the best. It is time that such a life is not distinctively human, but
   it is the privilege of man to partake in it, and such participation, at
   however rare intervals and for however short a period, is the highest
   Happiness which human life can offer. All other activities have value
   only because and in so far as they render this life possible.

   But it must not be forgotten that Aristotle conceives of this life as
   one of intense activity or energising: it is just this which gives it
   its supremacy. In spite of the almost religious fervour with which he
   speaks of it (“the most orthodox of his disciples” paraphrases his
   meaning by describing its content as “the service and vision of God”),
   it is clear that he identified it with the life of the philosopher, as
   he understood it, a life of ceaseless intellectual activity in which at
   least at times all the distractions and disturbances inseparable from
   practical life seemed to disappear and become as nothing. This ideal
   was partly an inheritance from the more ardent idealism of his master
   Plato, but partly it was the expression of personal experience.

   The nobility of this ideal cannot be questioned; the conception of the
   end of man or a life lived for truth—of a life blissfully absorbed in
   the vision of truth—is a lofty and inspiring one. But we cannot resist
   certain criticisms upon its presentation by Aristotle: (1) the relation
   of it to the lower ideal of practice is left somewhat obscure; (2) it
   is described in such a way as renders its realisation possible only to
   a gifted few, and under exceptional circumstances; (3) it seems in
   various ways, as regards its content, to be unnecessarily and
   unjustifiably limited. But it must be borne in mind that this is a
   first endeavour to determine its principle, and that similar failures
   have attended the attempts to describe the “religious” or the
   “spiritual” ideals of life, which have continually been suggested by
   the apparently inherent limitations of the “practical” or “moral” life,
   which is the subject of Moral Philosophy.

   The Moral Ideal to those who have most deeply reflected on it leads to
   the thought of an Ideal beyond and above it, which alone gives it
   meaning, but which seems to escape from definite conception by man. The
   richness and variety of this Ideal ceaselessly invite, but as
   ceaselessly defy, our attempts to imprison it in a definite formula or
   portray it in detailed imagination. Yet the thought of it is and
   remains inexpungable from our minds.

   This conception of the best life is not forgotten in the Politics The
   end of life in the state is itself well-living and well-doing—a life
   which helps to produce the best life The great agency in the production
   of such life is the State operating through Law, which is Reason backed
   by Force. For its greatest efficiency there is required the development
   of a science of legislation. The main drift of what he says here is
   that the most desirable thing would be that the best reason of the
   community should be embodied in its laws. But so far as that is not
   possible, it still is true that anyone who would make himself and
   others better must become a miniature legislator—must study the general
   principles of law, morality, and education. The conception of πολιτικὴ
   with which he opened the Ethics would serve as a guide to a father
   educating his children as well as to the legislator legislating for the
   state. Finding in his predecessors no developed doctrine on this
   subject, Aristotle proposes himself to undertake the construction of
   it, and sketches in advance the programme of the Politics in the
   concluding sentence of the Ethics His ultimate object is to answer the
   questions, What is the best form of Polity, how should each be
   constituted, and what laws and customs should it adopt and employ? Not
   till this answer is given will “the philosophy of human affairs” be
   complete.

   On looking back it will be seen that the discussion of the central
   topic of the nature and formation of character has expanded into a
   Philosophy of Human Conduct, merging at its beginning and end into
   metaphysics The result is a Moral Philosophy set against a background
   of Political Theory and general Philosophy. The most characteristic
   features of this Moral Philosophy are due to the fact of its
   essentially teleological view of human life and action: (1) Every human
   activity, but especially every human practical activity, is directed
   towards a simple End discoverable by reflection, and this End is
   conceived of as the object of universal human desire, as something to
   be enjoyed, not as something which ought to be done or enacted.
   Anstotle’s Moral Philosophy is not hedonistic but it is eudæmomstic,
   the end is the enjoyment of Happiness, not the fulfilment of Duty. (2)
   Every human practical activity derives its value from its efficiency as
   a means to that end, it is good or bad, right or wrong, as it conduces
   or fails to conduce to Happiness Thus his Moral Philosophy is
   essentially utilitarian or prudential Right action presupposes Thought
   or Thinking, partly on the development of a clearer and distincter
   conception of the end of desire, partly as the deduction from that of
   rules which state the normally effective conditions of its realisation.
   The thinking involved in right conduct is calculation—calculation of
   means to an end fixed by nature and foreknowable Action itself is at
   its best just the realisation of a scheme preconceived and thought out
   beforehand, commending itself by its inherent attractiveness or promise
   of enjoyment.

   This view has the great advantage of exhibiting morality as essentially
   reasonable, but the accompanying disadvantage of lowering it into a
   somewhat prosaic and unideal Prudentialism, nor is it saved from this
   by the tacking on to it, by a sort of after-thought, of the second and
   higher Ideal—an addition which ruins the coherence of the account
   without really transmuting its substance The source of our
   dissatisfaction with the whole theory lies deeper than in its tendency
   to identify the end with the maximum of enjoyment or satisfaction, or
   to regard the goodness or badness of acts and feelings as lying solely
   in their efficacy to produce such a result It arises from the
   application to morality of the distinction of means and end For this
   distinction, for all its plausibility and usefulness in ordinary
   thought and speech, cannot finally be maintained In morality—and this
   is vital to its character—everything is both means and end, and so
   neither in distinction or separation, and all thinking about it which
   presupposes the finality of this distinction wanders into misconception
   and error. The thinking which really matters in conduct is not a
   thinking which imaginatively forecasts ideals which promise to fulfil
   desire, or calculates means to their attainment—that is sometimes
   useful, sometimes harmful, and always subordinate, but thinking which
   reveals to the agent the situation in which he is to act, both, that
   is, the universal situation on which as man he always and everywhere
   stands, and the ever-varying and ever-novel situation in which he as
   this individual, here and now, finds himself. In such knowledge of
   given or historic fact lie the natural determinants of his conduct, in
   such knowledge alone lies the condition of his freedom and his good.

   But this does not mean that Moral Philosophy has not still much to
   learn from Aristotle’s Ethics. The work still remains one of the best
   introductions to a study of its important subject-matter, it spreads
   before us a view of the relevant facts, it reduces them to manageable
   compass and order, it raises some of the central problems, and makes
   acute and valuable suggestions towards their solution. Above all, it
   perpetually incites to renewed and independent reflection upon them.
