The Ethics of Aristotle

By Aristotle

Introduction by J. A. Smith


Contents

 INTRODUCTION

 ARISTOTLE’S ETHICS
 BOOK I
 BOOK II
 BOOK III
 BOOK IV
 BOOK V
 BOOK VI
 BOOK VII
 BOOK VIII
 BOOK IX
 BOOK X
 NOTES




INTRODUCTION


The _Ethics_ of Aristotle is one half of a single treatise of which his
_Politics_ is the other half. Both deal with one and the same subject.
This subject is what Aristotle calls in one place the “philosophy of
human affairs;” but more frequently Political or Social Science. In the
two works taken together we have their author’s whole theory of human
conduct or practical activity, that is, of all human activity which is
not directed merely to knowledge or truth. The two parts of this
treatise are mutually complementary, but in a literary sense each is
independent and self-contained. The proem to the _Ethics_ is an
introduction to the whole subject, not merely to the first part; the
last chapter of the _Ethics_ points forward to the _Politics_, and
sketches for that part of the treatise the order of enquiry to be
pursued (an order which in the actual treatise is not adhered to).

The principle of distribution of the subject-matter between the two
works is far from obvious, and has been much debated. Not much can be
gathered from their titles, which in any case were not given to them by
their author. Nor do these titles suggest any very compact unity in the
works to which they are applied: the plural forms, which survive so
oddly in English (Ethic_s_, Politic_s_), were intended to indicate the
treatment within a single work of a _group_ of connected questions. The
unity of the first group arises from their centring round the topic of
character, that of the second from their connection with the existence
and life of the city or state. We have thus to regard the _Ethics_ as
dealing with one group of problems and the _Politics_ with a second,
both falling within the wide compass of Political Science. Each of
these groups falls into sub-groups which roughly correspond to the
several books in each work. The tendency to take up one by one the
various problems which had suggested themselves in the wide field
obscures both the unity of the subject-matter and its proper
articulation. But it is to be remembered that what is offered us is
avowedly rather an enquiry than an exposition of hard and fast
doctrine.

Nevertheless each work aims at a relative completeness, and it is
important to observe the relation of each to the other. The distinction
is not that the one treats of Moral and the other of Political
Philosophy, nor again that the one deals with the moral activity of the
individual and the other with that of the State, nor once more that the
one gives us the theory of human conduct, while the other discusses its
application in practice, though not all of these misinterpretations are
equally erroneous. The clue to the right interpretation is given by
Aristotle himself, where in the last chapter of the _Ethics_ he is
paving the way for the _Politics_. In the _Ethics_ he has not confined
himself to the abstract or isolated individual, but has always thought
of him, or we might say, in his social and political context, with a
given nature due to race and heredity and in certain surroundings. So
viewing him he has studied the nature and formation of his
character—all that he can make himself or be made by others to be.
Especially he has investigated the various admirable forms of human
character and the mode of their production. But all this, though it
brings more clearly before us what goodness or virtue is, and how it is
to be reached, remains mere theory or talk. By itself it does not
enable us to become, or to help others to become, good. For this it is
necessary to bring into play the great force of the Political Community
or State, of which the main instrument is Law. Hence arises the demand
for the necessary complement to the _Ethics, i.e._, a treatise devoted
to the questions which centre round the enquiry; by what organisation
of social or political forces, by what laws or institutions can we best
secure the greatest amount of good character?

We must, however, remember that the production of good character is not
the end of either individual or state action: that is the aim of the
one and the other because good character is the indispensable condition
and chief determinant of happiness, itself the goal of all human doing.
The end of all action, individual or collective, is the greatest
happiness of the greatest number. There is, Aristotle insists, no
difference of kind between the good of one and the good of many or all.
The sole difference is one of amount or scale. This does not mean
simply that the State exists to secure in larger measure the objects of
degree which the isolated individual attempts, but is too feeble, to
secure without it. On the contrary, it rather insists that whatever
goods society alone enables a man to secure have always had to the
individual—whether he realised it or not—the value which, when so
secured, he recognises them to possess. The best and happiest life for
the individual is that which the State renders possible, and this it
does mainly by revealing to him the value of new objects of desire and
educating him to appreciate them. To Aristotle or to Plato the State
is, above all, a large and powerful educative agency which gives the
individual increased opportunities of self-development and greater
capacities for the enjoyment of life.

Looking forward, then, to the life of the State as that which aids
support, and combines the efforts of the individual to obtain
happiness, Aristotle draws no hard and fast distinction between the
spheres of action of Man as individual and Man as citizen. Nor does the
division of his discussion into the _Ethics_ and the _Politics_ rest
upon any such distinction. The distinction implied is rather between
two stages in the life of the civilised man—the stage of preparation
for the full life of the adult citizen, and the stage of the actual
exercise or enjoyment of citizenship. Hence the _Ethics_, where his
attention is directed upon the formation of character, is largely and
centrally a treatise on Moral Education. It discusses especially those
admirable human qualities which fit a man for life in an organised
civic community, which makes him “a good citizen,” and considers how
they can be fostered or created and their opposites prevented.

This is the kernel of the _Ethics_, and all the rest is subordinate to
this main interest and purpose. Yet “the rest” is not irrelevant; the
whole situation in which character grows and operates is concretely
conceived. There is a basis of what we should call Psychology, sketched
in firm outlines, the deeper presuppositions and the wider issues of
human character and conduct are not ignored, and there is no little of
what we should call Metaphysics. But neither the Psychology nor the
Metaphysics is elaborated, and only so much is brought forward as
appears necessary to put the main facts in their proper perspective and
setting. It is this combination of width of outlook with close
observation of the concrete facts of conduct which gives its abiding
value to the work, and justifies the view of it as containing
Aristotle’s Moral Philosophy. Nor is it important merely as summing up
the moral judgments and speculations of an age now long past. It seizes
and dwells upon those elements and features in human practice which are
most essential and permanent, and it is small wonder that so much in it
survives in our own ways of regarding conduct and speaking of it. Thus
it still remains one of the classics of Moral Philosophy, nor is its
value likely soon to be exhausted.

As was pointed out above, the proem (Book I., cc. i-iii.) is a prelude
to the treatment of the whole subject covered by the _Ethics_ and the
_Politics_ together. It sets forth the purpose of the enquiry,
describes the spirit in which it is to be undertaken and what ought to
be the expectation of the reader, and lastly states the necessary
conditions of studying it with profit. The aim of it is the acquisition
and propagation of a certain kind of knowledge (science), but this
knowledge and the thinking which brings it about are subsidiary to a
practical end. The knowledge aimed at is of what is best for man and of
the conditions of its realisation. Such knowledge is that which in its
consumate form we find in great statesmen, enabling them to organise
and administer their states and regulate by law the life of the
citizens to their advantage and happiness, but it is the same kind of
knowledge which on a smaller scale secures success in the management of
the family or of private life.

It is characteristic of such knowledge that it should be deficient in
“exactness,” in precision of statement, and closeness of logical
concatenation. We must not look for a mathematics of conduct. The
subject-matter of Human Conduct is not governed by necessary and
uniform laws. But this does not mean that it is subject to no laws.
There are general principles at work in it, and these can be formulated
in “rules,” which rules can be systematised or unified. It is
all-important to remember that practical or moral rules are only
general and always admit of exceptions, and that they arise not from
the mere complexity of the facts, but from the liability of the facts
to a certain unpredictable variation. At their very best, practical
rules state probabilities, not certainties; a relative constancy of
connection is all that exists, but it is enough to serve as a guide in
life. Aristotle here holds the balance between a misleading hope of
reducing the subject-matter of conduct to a few simple rigorous
abstract principles, with conclusions necessarily issuing from them,
and the view that it is the field of operation of inscrutable forces
acting without predictable regularity. He does not pretend to find in
it absolute uniformities, or to deduce the details from his principles.
Hence, too, he insists on the necessity of experience as the source or
test of all that he has to say. Moral experience—the actual possession
and exercise of good character—is necessary truly to understand moral
principles and profitably to apply them. The mere intellectual
apprehension of them is not possible, or if possible, profitless.

The _Ethics_ is addressed to students who are presumed both to have
enough general education to appreciate these points, and also to have a
solid foundation of good habits. More than that is not required for the
profitable study of it.

If the discussion of the nature and formation of character be regarded
as the central topic of the _Ethics_, the contents of Book I., cc.
iv.-xii. may be considered as still belonging to the introduction and
setting, but these chapters contain matter of profound importance and
have exercised an enormous influence upon subsequent thought. They lay
down a principle which governs all Greek thought about human life, viz.
that it is only intelligible when viewed as directed towards some end
or good. This is the Greek way of expressing that all human life
involves an ideal element—something which it is not yet and which under
certain conditions it is to be. In that sense Greek Moral Philosophy is
essentially idealistic. Further it is always assumed that all human
practical activity is directed or “oriented” to a _single_ end, and
that that end is knowable or definable in advance of its realisation.
To know it is not merely a matter of speculative interest, it is of the
highest practical moment for only in the light of it can life be duly
guided, and particularly only so can the state be properly organised
and administered. This explains the stress laid throughout by Greek
Moral Philosophy upon the necessity of knowledge as a condition of the
best life. This knowledge is not, though it includes knowledge of the
nature of man and his circumstances, it is knowledge of what is best—of
man’s supreme end or good.

But this end is not conceived as presented to him by a superior power
nor even as something which _ought_ to be. The presentation of the
Moral Ideal as Duty is almost absent. From the outset it is identified
with the object of desire, of what we not merely judge desirable but
actually do desire, or that which would, if realised, satisfy human
desire. In fact it is what we all, wise and simple, agree in naming
“Happiness” (Welfare or Well-being)

In what then does happiness consist? Aristotle summarily sets aside the
more or less popular identifications of it with abundance of physical
pleasures, with political power and honour, with the mere possession of
such superior gifts or attainments as normally entitle men to these,
with wealth. None of these can constitute the end or good of man as
such. On the other hand, he rejects his master Plato’s conception of a
good which is the end of the whole universe, or at least dismisses it
as irrelevant to his present enquiry. The good towards which all human
desires and practical activities are directed must be one conformable
to man’s special nature and circumstances and attainable by his
efforts. There is in Aristotle’s theory of human conduct no trace of
Plato’s “other worldliness”, he brings the moral ideal in Bacon’s
phrase down to “right earth”—and so closer to the facts and problems of
actual human living. Turning from criticism of others he states his own
positive view of Happiness, and, though he avowedly states it merely in
outline his account is pregnant with significance. Human Happiness lies
in activity or energising, and that in a way peculiar to man with his
given nature and his given circumstances, it is not theoretical, but
practical: it is the activity not of reason but still of a being who
possesses reason and applies it, and it presupposes in that being the
development, and not merely the natural possession, of certain relevant
powers and capacities. The last is the prime condition of successful
living and therefore of satisfaction, but Aristotle does not ignore
other conditions, such as length of life, wealth and good luck, the
absence or diminution of which render happiness not impossible, but
difficult of attainment.

It is interesting to compare this account of Happiness with Mill’s in
_Utilitarianism_. Mill’s is much the less consistent: at times he
distinguishes and at times he identifies, happiness, pleasure,
contentment, and satisfaction. He wavers between belief in its general
attainability and an absence of hopefulness. He mixes up in an
arbitrary way such ingredients as “not expecting more from life than it
is capable of bestowing,” “mental cultivation,” “improved laws,” etc.,
and in fact leaves the whole conception vague, blurred, and uncertain.
Aristotle draws the outline with a firmer hand and presents a more
definite ideal. He allows for the influence on happiness of conditions
only partly, if at all, within the control of man, but he clearly makes
the man positive determinant of man’s happiness he in himself, and more
particularly in what he makes directly of his own nature, and so
indirectly of his circumstances. “‘Tis in ourselves that we are thus or
thus” But once more this does not involve an artificial or abstract
isolation of the individual moral agent from his relation to other
persons or things from his context in society and nature, nor ignore
the relative dependence of his life upon a favourable environment.

The main factor which determines success or failure in human life is
the acquisition of certain powers, for Happiness is just the exercise
or putting forth of these in actual living, everything else is
secondary and subordinate. These powers arise from the due development
of certain natural aptitudes which belong (in various degrees) to human
nature as such and therefore to all normal human beings. In their
developed form they are known as virtues (the Greek means simply
“goodnesses,” “perfections,” “excellences,” or “fitnesses”), some of
them are physical, but others are psychical, and among the latter some,
and these distinctively or peculiarly human, are “rational,” _i e_,
presuppose the possession and exercise of mind or intelligence. These
last fall into two groups, which Aristotle distinguishes as Goodnesses
of Intellect and Goodnesses of Character. They have in common that they
all excite in us admiration and praise of their possessors, and that
they are not natural endowments, but acquired characteristics But they
differ in important ways. (1) the former are excellences or developed
powers of the reason as such—of that in us which sees and formulates
laws, rules, regularities systems, and is content in the vision of
them, while the latter involve a submission or obedience to such rules
of something in us which is in itself capricious and irregular, but
capable of regulation, viz our instincts and feelings, (2) the former
are acquired by study and instruction, the latter by discipline. The
latter constitute “character,” each of them as a “moral virtue”
(literally “a goodness of character”), and upon them primarily depends
the realisation of happiness. This is the case at least for the great
majority of men, and for all men their possession is an indispensable
basis of the best, _i e_, the most desirable life. They form the chief
or central subject-matter of the _Ethics_.

Perhaps the truest way of conceiving Aristotle’s meaning here is to
regard a moral virtue as a form of obedience to a maxim or rule of
conduct accepted by the agent as valid for a class of recurrent
situations in human life. Such obedience requires knowledge of the rule
and acceptance of it _as the rule_ of the agent’s own actions, but not
necessarily knowledge of its ground or of its systematic connexion with
other similarly known and similarly accepted rules (It may be remarked
that the Greek word usually translated “reason,” means in almost all
cases in the _Ethics_ such a rule, and not the faculty which
apprehends, formulates, considers them).

The “moral virtues and vices” make up what we call character, and the
important questions arise: (1) What is character? and (2) How is it
formed? (for character in this sense is not a natural endowment; it is
formed or produced). Aristotle deals with these questions in the
reverse order. His answers are peculiar and distinctive—not that they
are absolutely novel (for they are anticipated in Plato), but that by
him they are for the first time distinctly and clearly formulated.

(1.) Character, good or bad, is produced by what Aristotle calls
“habituation,” that is, it is the result of the repeated doing of acts
which have a similar or common quality. Such repetition acting upon
natural aptitudes or propensities gradually fixes them in one or other
of two opposite directions, giving them a bias towards good or evil.
Hence the several acts which determine goodness or badness of character
must be done in a certain way, and thus the formation of good character
requires discipline and direction from without. Not that the agent
himself contributes nothing to the formation of his character, but that
at first he needs guidance. The point is not so much that the process
cannot be safely left to Nature, but that it cannot be entrusted to
merely intellectual instruction. The process is one of assimilation,
largely by imitation and under direction and control. The result is a
growing understanding of what is done, a choice of it for its own sake,
a fixity and steadiness of purpose. Right acts and feelings become,
through habit, easier and more pleasant, and the doing of them a
“second nature.” The agent acquires the power of doing them freely,
willingly, more and more “of himself.”

But what are “right” acts? In the first place, they are those that
conform to a rule—to the right rule, and ultimately to reason. The
Greeks never waver from the conviction that in the end moral conduct is
essentially reasonable conduct. But there is a more significant way of
describing their “rightness,” and here for the first time Aristotle
introduces his famous “Doctrine of the Mean.” Reasoning from the
analogy of “right” physical acts, he pronounces that rightness always
means adaptation or adjustment to the special requirements of a
situation. To this adjustment he gives a quantitative interpretation.
To do (or to feel) what is right in a given situation is to do or to
feel just the amount required—neither more nor less: to do wrong is to
do or to feel too much or too little—to fall short of or over-shoot, “a
mean” determined by the situation. The repetition of acts which lie in
the mean is the cause of the formation of each and every “goodness of
character,” and for this “rules” can be given.

(2) What then is a “moral virtue,” the result of such a process duly
directed? It is no mere mood of feeling, no mere liability to emotion,
no mere natural aptitude or endowment, it is a permanent _state_ of the
agent’s self, or, as we might in modern phrase put it, of his will, it
consists in a steady self-imposed obedience to a rule of action in
certain situations which frequently recur in human life. The rule
prescribes the control and regulation within limits of the agent’s
natural impulses to act and feel thus and thus. The situations fall
into groups which constitute the “fields” of the several “moral
virtues”, for each there is a rule, conformity to which secures
rightness in the individual acts. Thus the moral ideal appears as a
code of rules, accepted by the agent, but as yet _to him_ without
rational justification and without system or unity. But the rules
prescribe no mechanical uniformity: each within its limits permits
variety, and the exactly right amount adopted to the requirements of
the individual situation (and every actual situation is individual)
must be determined by the intuition of the moment. There is no attempt
to reduce the rich possibilities of right action to a single monotonous
type. On the contrary, there are acknowledged to be many forms of moral
virtue, and there is a long list of them, with their correlative vices
enumerated.

The Doctrine of the Mean here takes a form in which it has impressed
subsequent thinkers, but which has less importance than is usually
ascribed to it. In the “Table of the Virtues and Vices,” each of the
virtues is flanked by two opposite vices, which are respectively the
excess and defect of that which in due measure constitutes the virtue.
Aristotle tries to show that this is the case in regard to every virtue
named and recognised as such, but his treatment is often forced and the
endeavour is not very successful. Except as a convenient principle of
arrangement of the various forms of praiseworthy or blameworthy
characters, generally acknowledged as such by Greek opinion, this form
of the doctrine is of no great significance.

Books III-V are occupied with a survey of the moral virtues and vices.
These seem to have been undertaken in order to verify in detail the
general account, but this aim is not kept steadily in view. Nor is
there any well-considered principle of classification. What we find is
a sort of portrait-gallery of the various types of moral excellence
which the Greeks of the author’s age admired and strove to encourage.
The discussion is full of acute, interesting and sometimes profound
observations. Some of the types are those which are and will be admired
at all times, but others are connected with peculiar features of Greek
life which have now passed away. The most important is that of Justice
or the Just Man, to which we may later return. But the discussion is
preceded by an attempt to elucidate some difficult and obscure points
in the general account of moral virtue and action (Book III, cc i-v).
This section is concerned with the notion of Responsibility. The
discussion designedly excludes what we may call the metaphysical issues
of the problem, which here present themselves, it moves on the level of
thought of the practical man, the statesman, and the legislator.
Coercion and ignorance of relevant circumstances render acts
involuntary and exempt their doer from responsibility, otherwise the
act is voluntary and the agent responsible, choice or preference of
what is done, and inner consent to the deed, are to be presumed.
Neither passion nor ignorance of the right rule can extenuate
responsibility. But there is a difference between acts done voluntarily
and acts done of _set_ choice or purpose. The latter imply
Deliberation. Deliberation involves thinking, thinking out means to
ends: in deliberate acts the whole nature of the agent consents to and
enters into the act, and in a peculiar sense they are his, they _are_
him in action, and the most significant evidence of what he is.
Aristotle is unable wholly to avoid allusion to the metaphysical
difficulties and what he does here say upon them is obscure and
unsatisfactory. But he insists upon the importance in moral action of
the agent’s inner consent, and on the reality of his individual
responsibility. For his present purpose the metaphysical difficulties
are irrelevant.

The treatment of Justice in Book V has always been a source of great
difficulty to students of the _Ethics_. Almost more than any other part
of the work it has exercised influence upon mediaeval and modern
thought upon the subject. The distinctions and divisions have become
part of the stock-in-trade of would be philosophic jurists. And yet,
oddly enough, most of these distinctions have been misunderstood and
the whole purport of the discussion misconceived. Aristotle is here
dealing with justice in a restricted sense viz as that special goodness
of character which is required of every adult citizen and which can be
produced by early discipline or habituation. It is the temper or
habitual attitude demanded of the citizen for the due exercise of his
functions as taking part in the administration of the civic
community—as a member of the judicature and executive. The Greek
citizen was only exceptionally, and at rare intervals if ever, a
law-maker while at any moment he might be called upon to act as a judge
(juryman or arbitrator) or as an administrator. For the work of a
legislator far more than the moral virtue of justice or fairmindedness
was necessary, these were requisite to the rarer and higher
“intellectual virtue” of practical wisdom. Then here, too, the
discussion moves on a low level, and the raising of fundamental
problems is excluded. Hence “distributive justice” is concerned not
with the large question of the distribution of political power and
privileges among the constituent members or classes of the state but
with the smaller questions of the distribution among those of casual
gains and even with the division among private claimants of a common
fund or inheritance, while “corrective justice” is concerned solely
with the management of legal redress. The whole treatment is confused
by the unhappy attempt to give a precise mathematical form to the
principles of justice in the various fields distinguished. Still it
remains an interesting first endeavour to give greater exactness to
some of the leading conceptions of jurisprudence.

Book VI appears to have in view two aims: (1) to describe goodness of
intellect and discover its highest form or forms; (2) to show how this
is related to goodness of character, and so to conduct generally. As
all thinking is either theoretical or practical, goodness of intellect
has _two_ supreme forms—Theoretical and Practical Wisdom. The first,
which apprehends the eternal laws of the universe, has no direct
relation to human conduct: the second is identical with that master
science of human life of which the whole treatise, consisting of the
_Ethics_ and the _Politics_, is an exposition. It is this science which
supplies the right rules of conduct Taking them as they emerge in and
from practical experience, it formulates them more precisely and
organises them into a system where they are all seen to converge upon
happiness. The mode in which such knowledge manifests itself is in the
power to show that such and such rules of action follow from the very
nature of the end or good for man. It presupposes and starts from a
clear conception of the end and the wish for it as conceived, and it
proceeds by a deduction which is dehberation writ large. In the man of
practical wisdom this process has reached its perfect result, and the
code of right rules is apprehended as a system with a single principle
and so as something wholly rational or reasonable He has not on each
occasion to seek and find the right rule applicable to the situation,
he produces it at once from within himself, and can at need justify it
by exhibiting its rationale, _i.e._ , its connection with the end. This
is the consummate form of reason applied to conduct, but there are
minor forms of it, less independent or original, but nevertheless of
great value, such as the power to think out the proper cause of policy
in novel circumstances or the power to see the proper line of treatment
to follow in a court of law.

The form of the thinking which enters into conduct is that which
terminates in the production of a rule which declares some means to the
end of life. The process presupposes _(a)_ a clear and just
apprehension of the nature of that end—such as the _Ethics_ itself
endeavours to supply; _(b)_ a correct perception of the conditions of
action, _(a)_ at least is impossible except to a man whose character
has been duly formed by discipline; it arises only in a man who has
acquired moral virtue. For such action and feeling as forms bad
character, blinds the eye of the soul and corrupts the moral principle,
and the place of practical wisdom is taken by that parody of itself
which Aristotle calls “cleverness”—the “wisdom” of the unscrupulous man
of the world. Thus true practical wisdom and true goodness of character
are interdependent; neither is genuinely possible or “completely”
present without the other. This is Aristotle’s contribution to the
discussion of the question, so central in Greek Moral Philosophy, of
the relation of the intellectual and the passionate factors in conduct.

Aristotle is not an intuitionist, but he recognises the implication in
conduct of a direct and immediate apprehension both of the end and of
the character of his circumstances under which it is from moment to
moment realised. The directness of such apprehension makes it analogous
to sensation or sense-perception; but it is on his view in the end due
to the existence or activity in man of that power in him which is the
highest thing in his nature, and akin to or identical with the divine
nature—mind, or intelligence. It is this which reveals to us what is
best for us—the ideal of a happiness which is the object of our real
wish and the goal of all our efforts. But beyond and above the
practical ideal of what is best _for man_ begins to show itself another
and still higher ideal—that of a life not distinctively human or in a
narrow sense practical, yet capable of being participated in by man
even under the actual circumstances of this world. For a time, however,
this further and higher ideal is ignored.

The next book (Book VII.), is concerned partly with moral conditions,
in which the agent seems to rise above the level of moral virtue or
fall below that of moral vice, but partly and more largely with
conditions in which the agent occupies a middle position between the
two. Aristotle’s attention is here directed chiefly towards the
phenomena of “Incontinence,” weakness of will or imperfect
self-control. This condition was to the Greeks a matter of only too
frequent experience, but it appeared to them peculiarly difficult to
understand. How can a man know what is good or best for him, and yet
chronically fail to act upon his knowledge? Socrates was driven to the
paradox of denying the possibility, but the facts are too strong for
him. Knowledge of the right rule may be present, nay the rightfulness
of its authority may be acknowledged, and yet time after time it may be
disobeyed; the will may be good and yet overmastered by the force of
desire, so that the act done is contrary to the agent’s will.
Nevertheless the act may be the agent’s, and the will therefore divided
against itself. Aristotle is aware of the seriousness and difficulty of
the problem, but in spite of the vividness with which he pictures, and
the acuteness with which he analyses, the situation in which such
action occurs, it cannot be said that he solves the problem. It is time
that he rises above the abstract view of it as a conflict between
reason and passion, recognising that passion is involved in the
knowledge which in conduct prevails or is overborne, and that the force
which leads to the wrong act is not blind or ignorant passion, but
always has some reason in it. But he tends to lapse back into the
abstraction, and his final account is perplexed and obscure. He finds
the source of the phenomenon in the nature of the desire for bodily
pleasures, which is not irrational but has something rational in it.
Such pleasures are not necessarily or inherently bad, as has sometimes
been maintained; on the contrary, they are good, but only in certain
amounts or under certain conditions, so that the will is often misled,
hesitates, and is lost.

Books VIII. and IX. (on Friendship) are almost an interruption of the
argument. The subject-matter of them was a favourite topic of ancient
writers, and the treatment is smoother and more orderly than elsewhere
in the _Ethics_. The argument is clear, and may be left without comment
to the readers. These books contain a necessary and attractive
complement to the somewhat dry account of Greek morality in the
preceding books, and there are in them profound reflections on what may
be called the metaphysics of friendship or love.

At the beginning of Book X. we return to the topic of Pleasure, which
is now regarded from a different point of view. In Book VII. the
antagonists were those who over-emphasised the irrationality or badness
of Pleasure: here it is rather those who so exaggerate its value as to
confuse or identify it with the good or Happiness. But there is offered
us in this section much more than criticism of the errors of others.
Answers are given both to the psychological question, “What is
Pleasure?” and to the ethical question, “What is its value?” Pleasure,
we are told, is the natural concomitant and index of perfect activity,
distinguishable but inseparable from it—“the activity of a subject at
its best acting upon an object at its best.” It is therefore always and
in itself a good, but its value rises and falls with that of the
activity with which it is conjoined, and which it intensifies and
perfects. Hence it follows that the highest and best pleasures are
those which accompany the highest and best activity.

Pleasure is, therefore, a necessary element in the best life, but it is
not the whole of it nor the principal ingredient. The value of a life
depends upon the nature and worth of the activity which it involves;
given the maximum of full free action, the maximum of pleasure
necessary follows. But on what sort of life is such activity possible?
This leads us back to the question, What is happiness? In what life can
man find the fullest satisfaction for his desires? To this question
Aristotle gives an answer which cannot but surprise us after what has
preceded. True Happiness, great satisfaction, cannot be found by man in
any form of “practical” life, no, not in the fullest and freest
exercise possible of the “moral virtues,” not in the life of the
citizen or of the great soldier or statesman. To seek it there is to
court failure and disappointment. It is to be found in the life of the
onlooker, the disinterested spectator; or, to put it more distinctly,
“in the life of the philosopher, the life of scientific and philosophic
contemplation.” The highest and most satisfying form of life possible
to man is “the contemplative life”; it is only in a secondary sense and
for those incapable of their life, that the practical or moral ideal is
the best. It is time that such a life is not distinctively human, but
it is the privilege of man to partake in it, and such participation, at
however rare intervals and for however short a period, is the highest
Happiness which human life can offer. All other activities have value
only because and in so far as they render _this_ life possible.

But it must not be forgotten that Aristotle conceives of this life as
one of intense activity or energising: it is just this which gives it
its supremacy. In spite of the almost religious fervour with which he
speaks of it (“the most orthodox of his disciples” paraphrases his
meaning by describing its content as “the service and vision of God”),
it is clear that he identified it with the life of the philosopher, as
he understood it, a life of ceaseless intellectual activity in which at
least at times all the distractions and disturbances inseparable from
practical life seemed to disappear and become as nothing. This ideal
was partly an inheritance from the more ardent idealism of his master
Plato, but partly it was the expression of personal experience.

The nobility of this ideal cannot be questioned; the conception of the
end of man or a life lived for truth—of a life blissfully absorbed in
the vision of truth—is a lofty and inspiring one. But we cannot resist
certain criticisms upon its presentation by Aristotle: (1) the relation
of it to the lower ideal of practice is left somewhat obscure; (2) it
is described in such a way as renders its realisation possible only to
a gifted few, and under exceptional circumstances; (3) it seems in
various ways, as regards its content, to be unnecessarily and
unjustifiably limited. But it must be borne in mind that this is a
first endeavour to determine its principle, and that similar failures
have attended the attempts to describe the “religious” or the
“spiritual” ideals of life, which have continually been suggested by
the apparently inherent limitations of the “practical” or “moral” life,
which is the subject of Moral Philosophy.

The Moral Ideal to those who have most deeply reflected on it leads to
the thought of an Ideal beyond and above it, which alone gives it
meaning, but which seems to escape from definite conception by man. The
richness and variety of this Ideal ceaselessly invite, but as
ceaselessly defy, our attempts to imprison it in a definite formula or
portray it in detailed imagination. Yet the thought of it is and
remains inexpungable from our minds.

This conception of the best life is not forgotten in the _Politics_ The
end of life in the state is itself well-living and well-doing—a life
which helps to produce the best life The great agency in the production
of such life is the State operating through Law, which is Reason backed
by Force. For its greatest efficiency there is required the development
of a science of legislation. The main drift of what he says here is
that the most desirable thing would be that the best reason of the
community should be embodied in its laws. But so far as that is not
possible, it still is true that anyone who would make himself and
others better must become a miniature legislator—must study the general
principles of law, morality, and education. The conception of πολιτικὴ
with which he opened the _Ethics_ would serve as a guide to a father
educating his children as well as to the legislator legislating for the
state. Finding in his predecessors no developed doctrine on this
subject, Aristotle proposes himself to undertake the construction of
it, and sketches in advance the programme of the _Politics_ in the
concluding sentence of the _Ethics_ His ultimate object is to answer
the questions, What is the best form of Polity, how should each be
constituted, and what laws and customs should it adopt and employ? Not
till this answer is given will “the philosophy of human affairs” be
complete.

On looking back it will be seen that the discussion of the central
topic of the nature and formation of character has expanded into a
Philosophy of Human Conduct, merging at its beginning and end into
metaphysics The result is a Moral Philosophy set against a background
of Political Theory and general Philosophy. The most characteristic
features of this Moral Philosophy are due to the fact of its
essentially teleological view of human life and action: (1) Every human
activity, but especially every human practical activity, is directed
towards a simple End discoverable by reflection, and this End is
conceived of as the object of universal human desire, as something to
be enjoyed, not as something which ought to be done or enacted.
Anstotle’s Moral Philosophy is not hedonistic but it is eudæmomstic,
the end is the enjoyment of Happiness, not the fulfilment of Duty. (2)
Every human practical activity derives its value from its efficiency as
a means to that end, it is good or bad, right or wrong, as it conduces
or fails to conduce to Happiness Thus his Moral Philosophy is
essentially utilitarian or prudential Right action presupposes Thought
or Thinking, partly on the development of a clearer and distincter
conception of the end of desire, partly as the deduction from that of
rules which state the normally effective conditions of its realisation.
The thinking involved in right conduct is calculation—calculation of
means to an end fixed by nature and foreknowable Action itself is at
its best just the realisation of a scheme preconceived and thought out
beforehand, commending itself by its inherent attractiveness or promise
of enjoyment.

This view has the great advantage of exhibiting morality as essentially
reasonable, but the accompanying disadvantage of lowering it into a
somewhat prosaic and unideal Prudentialism, nor is it saved from this
by the tacking on to it, by a sort of after-thought, of the second and
higher Ideal—an addition which ruins the coherence of the account
without really transmuting its substance The source of our
dissatisfaction with the whole theory lies deeper than in its tendency
to identify the end with the maximum of enjoyment or satisfaction, or
to regard the goodness or badness of acts and feelings as lying solely
in their efficacy to produce such a result It arises from the
application to morality of the distinction of means and end For this
distinction, for all its plausibility and usefulness in ordinary
thought and speech, cannot finally be maintained In morality—and this
is vital to its character—everything is both means and end, and so
neither in distinction or separation, and all thinking about it which
presupposes the finality of this distinction wanders into misconception
and error. The thinking which really matters in conduct is not a
thinking which imaginatively forecasts ideals which promise to fulfil
desire, or calculates means to their attainment—that is sometimes
useful, sometimes harmful, and always subordinate, but thinking which
reveals to the agent the situation in which he is to act, both, that
is, the universal situation on which as man he always and everywhere
stands, and the ever-varying and ever-novel situation in which he as
this individual, here and now, finds himself. In such knowledge of
given or historic fact lie the natural determinants of his conduct, in
such knowledge alone lies the condition of his freedom and his good.

But this does not mean that Moral Philosophy has not still much to
learn from Aristotle’s _Ethics_. The work still remains one of the best
introductions to a study of its important subject-matter, it spreads
before us a view of the relevant facts, it reduces them to manageable
compass and order, it raises some of the central problems, and makes
acute and valuable suggestions towards their solution. Above all, it
perpetually incites to renewed and independent reflection upon them.

J. A. SMITH

 The following is a list of the works of Aristotle:—

First edition of works (with omission of Rhetorica, Poetica, and second
book of Economica), 5 vols by Aldus Manutius, Venice, 1495 8, re
impression supervised by Erasmus and with certain corrections by
Grynaeus (including Rhetorica and Poetica), 1531, 1539, revised 1550,
later editions were followed by that of Immanuel Bekker and Brandis
(Greek and Latin), 5 vols. The 5th vol contains the Index by Bomtz,
1831-70, Didot edition (Greek and Latin), 5 vols 1848 74

ENGLISH TRANSLATIONS Edited by T Taylor, with Porphyry’s Introduction,
9 vols, 1812, under editorship of J A Smith and W D Ross, II vols,
1908-31, Loeb editions Ethica, Rhetorica, Poetica, Physica, Politica,
Metaphysica, 1926-33

Later editions of separate works _De Anima_ Torstrik, 1862,
Trendelenburg, 2nd edition, 1877, with English translation, L Wallace,
1882, Biehl, 1884, 1896, with English, R D Hicks, 1907 _Ethica_ J S
Brewer (Nicomachean), 1836, W E Jelf, 1856, J F T Rogers, 1865, A
Grant, 1857 8, 1866, 1874, 1885, E Moore, 1871, 1878, 4th edition,
1890, Ramsauer (Nicomachean), 1878, Susemihl, 1878, 1880, revised by O
Apelt, 1903, A Grant, 1885, I Bywater (Nicomachean), 1890, J Burnet,
1900

_Historia Animalium_ Schneider, 1812, Aubert and Wimmer, 1860;
Dittmeyer, 1907

_Metaphysica_ Schwegler, 1848, W Christ, 1899

_Organon_ Waitz, 1844 6

_Poetica_ Vahlen, 1867, 1874, with Notes by E Moore, 1875, with English
translation by E R Wharton, 1883, 1885, Uberweg, 1870, 1875, with
German translation, Susemihl, 1874, Schmidt, 1875, Christ, 1878, I
Bywater, 1898, T G Tucker, 1899

_De Republica Athenientium_ Text and facsimile of Papyrus, F G Kenyon,
1891, 3rd edition, 1892, Kaibel and Wilamowitz-Moellendorf, 1891, 3rd
edition, 1898, Van Herwerden and Leeuwen (from Kenyon’s text), 1891,
Blass, 1892, 1895, 1898, 1903, J E Sandys, 1893

_Politica_ Susemihl, 1872, with German, 1878, 3rd edition, 1882,
Susemihl and Hicks, 1894, etc, O Immisch, 1909

_Physica_ C Prantl, 1879

_Rhetorica_ Stahr, 1862, Sprengel (with Latin text), 1867, Cope and
Sandys, 1877, Roemer, 1885, 1898

ENGLISH TRANSLATIONS OF ONE OR MORE WORKS De Anima (with Parva
Naturalia), by W A Hammond, 1902 Ethica Of Morals to Nicomachus, by E
Pargiter, 1745, with Politica by J Gillies, 1797, 1804, 1813, with
Rhetorica and Poetica, by T Taylor, 1818, and later editions
Nicomachean Ethics, 1819, mainly from text of Bekker by D P Chase,
1847, revised 1861, and later editions, with an introductory essay by G
H Lewes (Camelot Classics) 1890, re-edited by J M Mitchell (New
Universal Library), 1906, 1910, by R W Browne (Bohn’s Classical
Library), 1848, etc, by R Williams, 1869, 1876, by W M Hatch and others
(with translation of paraphrase attributed to Andronicus of Rhodes),
edited by E Hatch, 1879 by F H Peters, 1881, J E C Welldon, 1892, J
Gillies (Lubbock’s Hundred Books) 1893 Historia Animalium, by R
Creswell (Bonn’s Classical Library) 1848, with Treatise on Physiognomy,
by T Taylor, 1809 Metaphysica, by T Taylor, 1801, by J H M Mahon
(Bohn’s Classical Library), 1848 Organon, with Porphyry’s Introduction,
by O F Owen (Bohn’s Classical Library), 1848 Posterior Analytics, E
Poste, 1850, E S Bourchier, 1901, On Fallacies, E Poste, 1866 Parva
Naturaha (Greek and English), by G R T Ross, 1906, with De Anima, by W
A Hammond, 1902 Youth and Old Age, Life and Death and Respiration, W
Ogle 1897 Poetica, with Notes from the French of D Acier, 1705, by H J
Pye, 1788, 1792, T Twining, 1789, 1812, with Preface and Notes by H
Hamilton, 1851, Treatise on Rhetorica and Poetica, by T Hobbes (Bohn’s
Classical Library), 1850, by Wharton, 1883 (see Greek version), S H
Butcher, 1895, 1898, 3rd edition, 1902, E S Bourchier, 1907, by Ingram
Bywater, 1909 De Partibus Animalium, W Ogle, 1882 De Republica
Athenientium, by E Poste, 1891, F G Kenyon, 1891, T J Dymes, 1891 De
Virtutibus et Vitus, by W Bridgman, 1804 Politica, from the French of
Regius, 1598, by W Ellis, 1776, 1778, 1888 (Morley’s Universal
Library), 1893 (Lubbock’s Hundred Books) by E Walford (with Æconomics,
and Life by Dr Gillies), (Bohn’s Classical Library), 1848, J E. C.
Welldon, 1883, B Jowett, 1885, with Introduction and Index by H W C
Davis, 1905, Books i iii iv (vii) from Bekker’s text by W E Bolland,
with Introduction by A Lang, 1877. Problemata (with writings of other
philosophers), 1597, 1607, 1680, 1684, etc. Rhetorica, A summary by T
Hobbes, 1655 (?), new edition, 1759, by the translators of the Art of
Thinking, 1686, 1816, by D M Crimmin, 1812, J Gillies, 1823, Anon 1847,
J E C Welldon, 1886, R C Jebb, with Introduction and Supplementary
Notes by J E Sandys, 1909 (see under Poetica and Ethica). Secreta
Secretorum (supposititious work), Anon 1702, from the Hebrew version by
M Gaster, 1907, 1908. Version by Lydgate and Burgh, edited by R Steele
(E E T S), 1894, 1898.

LIFE, ETC J W Blakesley, 1839, A Crichton (Jardine’s Naturalist’s
Library), 1843, JS Blackie, Four Phases of Morals, Socrates, Aristotle,
etc, 1871, G Grote, Aristotle, edited by A Bain and G C Robertson,
1872, 1880, E Wallace, Outlines of the Philosophy of Aristotle, 1875,
1880, A Grant (Ancient Classics for English readers), 1877, T Davidson,
Aristotle and Ancient Educational Ideals (Great Educators), 1892, F
Sewall, Swedenborg and Aristotle, 1895, W A Heidel, The Necessary and
the Contingent of the Aristotelian System (University of Chicago
Contributions to Philosophy), 1896, F W Bain, On the Realisation of the
Possible, and the Spirit of Aristotle, 1899, J H Hyslop, The Ethics of
the Greek Philosophers, etc (Evolution of Ethics), 1903, M V Williams,
Six Essays on the Platonic Theory of Knowledge as expounded in the
later dialogues and reviewed by Aristotle, 1908, J M Watson,
Aristotle’s Criticism of Plato, 1909 A E Taylor, Aristotle, 1919, W D
Ross, Aristotle, 1923.




ARISTOTLE’S ETHICS




BOOK I

Chapter I.


Every art, and every science reduced to a teachable form, and in like
manner every action and moral choice, aims, it is thought, at some
good: for which reason a common and by no means a bad description of
the Chief Good is, “that which all things aim at.”

Now there plainly is a difference in the Ends proposed: for in some
cases they are acts of working, and in others certain works or tangible
results beyond and beside the acts of working: and where there are
certain Ends beyond and beside the actions, the works are in their
nature better than the acts of working. Again, since actions and arts
and sciences are many, the Ends likewise come to be many: of the
healing art, for instance, health; of the ship-building art, a vessel;
of the military art, victory; and of domestic management, wealth; are
respectively the Ends.

And whatever of such actions, arts, or sciences range under some one
faculty (as under that of horsemanship the art of making bridles, and
all that are connected with the manufacture of horse-furniture in
general; this itself again, and every action connected with war, under
the military art; and in the same way others under others), in all
such, the Ends of the master-arts are more choice-worthy than those
ranging under them, because it is with a view to the former that the
latter are pursued.

(And in this comparison it makes no difference whether the acts of
working are themselves the Ends of the actions, or something further
beside them, as is the case in the arts and sciences we have been just
speaking of.)

Since then of all things which may be done there is some one End which
we desire for its own sake, and with a view to which we desire
everything else; and since we do not choose in all instances with a
further End in view (for then men would go on without limit, and so the
desire would be unsatisfied and fruitless), this plainly must be the
Chief Good, _i.e._ the best thing of all.

Surely then, even with reference to actual life and conduct, the
knowledge of it must have great weight; and like archers, with a mark
in view, we shall be more likely to hit upon what is right: and if so,
we ought to try to describe, in outline at least, what it is and of
which of the sciences and faculties it is the End.

Now one would naturally suppose it to be the End of that which is most
commanding and most inclusive: and to this description, πολιτικὴ[1]
plainly answers: for this it is that determines which of the sciences
should be in the communities, and which kind individuals are to learn,
and what degree of proficiency is to be required. Again; we see also
ranging under this the most highly esteemed faculties, such as the art
military, and that of domestic management, and Rhetoric. Well then,
since this uses all the other practical sciences, and moreover lays
down rules as to what men are to do, and from what to abstain, the End
of this must include the Ends of the rest, and so must be The Good of
Man. And grant that this is the same to the individual and to the
community, yet surely that of the latter is plainly greater and more
perfect to discover and preserve: for to do this even for a single
individual were a matter for contentment; but to do it for a whole
nation, and for communities generally, were more noble and godlike.

Such then are the objects proposed by our treatise, which is of the
nature of πολιτικὴ: and I conceive I shall have spoken on them
satisfactorily, if they be made as distinctly clear as the nature of
the subject-matter will admit: for exactness must not be looked for in
all discussions alike, any more than in all works of handicraft. Now
the notions of nobleness and justice, with the examination of which
πολιτικὴ is concerned, admit of variation and error to such a degree,
that they are supposed by some to exist conventionally only, and not in
the nature of things: but then, again, the things which are allowed to
be goods admit of a similar error, because harm comes to many from
them: for before now some have perished through wealth, and others
through valour.

We must be content then, in speaking of such things and from such data,
to set forth the truth roughly and in outline; in other words, since we
are speaking of general matter and from general data, to draw also
conclusions merely general. And in the same spirit should each person
receive what we say: for the man of education will seek exactness so
far in each subject as the nature of the thing admits, it being plainly
much the same absurdity to put up with a mathematician who tries to
persuade instead of proving, and to demand strict demonstrative
reasoning of a Rhetorician.

Now each man judges well what he knows, and of these things he is a
good judge: on each particular matter then he is a good judge who has
been instructed in _it_, and in a general way the man of general mental
cultivation.[2]

Hence the young man is not a fit student of Moral Philosophy, for he
has no experience in the actions of life, while all that is said
presupposes and is concerned with these: and in the next place, since
he is apt to follow the impulses of his passions, he will hear as
though he heard not, and to no profit, the end in view being practice
and not mere knowledge.

And I draw no distinction between young in years, and youthful in
temper and disposition: the defect to which I allude being no direct
result of the time, but of living at the beck and call of passion, and
following each object as it rises.[3] For to them that are such the
knowledge comes to be unprofitable, as to those of imperfect
self-control: but, to those who form their desires and act in
accordance with reason, to have knowledge on these points must be very
profitable.

Let thus much suffice by way of preface on these three points, the
student, the spirit in which our observations should be received, and
the object which we propose.

Chapter II.

And now, resuming the statement with which we commenced, since all
knowledge and moral choice grasps at good of some kind or another, what
good is that which we say πολιτικὴ aims at? or, in other words, what is
the highest of all the goods which are the objects of action?

So far as name goes, there is a pretty general agreement: for HAPPINESS
both the multitude and the refined few call it, and “living well” and
“doing well” they conceive to be the same with “being happy;” but about
the Nature of this Happiness, men dispute, and the multitude do not in
their account of it agree with the wise. For some say it is some one of
those things which are palpable and apparent, as pleasure or wealth or
honour; in fact, some one thing, some another; nay, oftentimes the same
man gives a different account of it; for when ill, he calls it health;
when poor, wealth: and conscious of their own ignorance, men admire
those who talk grandly and above their comprehension. Some again held
it to be something by itself, other than and beside these many good
things, which is in fact to all these the cause of their being good.

Now to sift all the opinions would be perhaps rather a fruitless task;
so it shall suffice to sift those which are most generally current, or
are thought to have some reason in them.

And here we must not forget the difference between reasoning from
principles, and reasoning to principles: for with good cause did Plato
too doubt about this, and enquire whether the right road is from
principles or to principles, just as in the racecourse from the judges
to the further end, or _vice versâ_.

Of course, we must begin with what is known; but then this is of two
kinds, what we _do_ know, and what we _may_ know:[5] perhaps then as
individuals we must begin with what we _do_ know. Hence the necessity
that he should have been well trained in habits, who is to study, with
any tolerable chance of profit, the principles of nobleness and justice
and moral philosophy generally. For a principle is a matter of fact,
and if the fact is sufficiently clear to a man there will be no need in
addition of the reason for the fact. And he that has been thus trained
either has principles already, or can receive them easily: as for him
who neither has nor can receive them, let him hear his sentence from
Hesiod:

He is best of all who of himself conceiveth all things;
Good again is he too who can adopt a good suggestion;
But whoso neither of himself conceiveth nor hearing from another
Layeth it to heart;—he is a useless man.

Chapter III.

But to return from this digression.

Now of the Chief Good (_i.e._ of Happiness) men seem to form their
notions from the different modes of life, as we might naturally expect:
the many and most low conceive it to be pleasure, and hence they are
content with the life of sensual enjoyment. For there are three lines
of life which stand out prominently to view: that just mentioned, and
the life in society, and, thirdly, the life of contemplation.

Now the many are plainly quite slavish, choosing a life like that of
brute animals: yet they obtain some consideration, because many of the
great share the tastes of Sardanapalus. The refined and active again
conceive it to be honour: for this may be said to be the end of the
life in society: yet it is plainly too superficial for the object of
our search, because it is thought to rest with those who pay rather
than with him who receives it, whereas the Chief Good we feel
instinctively must be something which is our own, and not easily to be
taken from us.

And besides, men seem to pursue honour, that they may believe
themselves to be good:[6] for instance, they seek to be honoured by the
wise, and by those among whom they are known, and for virtue: clearly
then, in the opinion at least of these men, virtue is higher than
honour. In truth, one would be much more inclined to think this to be
the end of the life in society; yet this itself is plainly not
sufficiently final: for it is conceived possible, that a man possessed
of virtue might sleep or be inactive all through his life, or, as a
third case, suffer the greatest evils and misfortunes: and the man who
should live thus no one would call happy, except for mere disputation’s
sake.[7]

And for these let thus much suffice, for they have been treated of at
sufficient length in my Encyclia.[8]

A third line of life is that of contemplation, concerning which we
shall make our examination in the following pages.[9]

As for the life of money-making, it is one of constraint, and wealth
manifestly is not the good we are seeking, because it is for use, that
is, for the sake of something further: and hence one would rather
conceive the forementioned ends to be the right ones, for men rest
content with them for their own sakes. Yet, clearly, they are not the
objects of our search either, though many words have been wasted on
them.[10] So much then for these.

Again, the notion of one Universal Good (the same, that is, in all
things), it is better perhaps we should examine, and discuss the
meaning of it, though such an enquiry is unpleasant, because they are
friends of ours who have introduced these εἴδη.[11] Still perhaps it
may appear better, nay to be our duty where the safety of the truth is
concerned, to upset if need be even our own theories, specially as we
are lovers of wisdom: for since both are dear to us, we are bound to
prefer the truth. Now they who invented this doctrine of εἴδη, did not
apply it to those things in which they spoke of priority and
posteriority, and so they never made any ἰδέα of numbers; but good is
predicated in the categories of Substance, Quality, and Relation; now
that which exists of itself, i.e. Substance, is prior in the nature of
things to that which is relative, because this latter is an off-shoot,
as it were, and result of that which is; on their own principle then
there cannot be a common ἰδέα in the case of these.

In the next place, since good is predicated in as many ways as there
are modes of existence [for it is predicated in the category of
Substance, as God, Intellect—and in that of Quality, as The Virtues—and
in that of Quantity, as The Mean—and in that of Relation, as The
Useful—and in that of Time, as Opportunity—and in that of Place, as
Abode; and other such like things], it manifestly cannot be something
common and universal and one in all: else it would not have been
predicated in all the categories, but in one only.

Thirdly, since those things which range under one ἰδέα are also under
the cognisance of one science, there would have been, on their theory,
only one science taking cognisance of all goods collectively: but in
fact there are many even for those which range under one category: for
instance, of Opportunity or Seasonableness (which I have before
mentioned as being in the category of Time), the science is, in war,
generalship; in disease, medical science; and of the Mean (which I
quoted before as being in the category of Quantity), in food, the
medical science; and in labour or exercise, the gymnastic science. A
person might fairly doubt also what in the world they mean by very-this
that or the other, since, as they would themselves allow, the account
of the humanity is one and the same in the very-Man, and in any
individual Man: for so far as the individual and the very-Man are both
Man, they will not differ at all: and if so, then very-good and any
particular good will not differ, in so far as both are good. Nor will
it do to say, that the eternity of the very-good makes it to be more
good; for what has lasted white ever so long, is no whiter than what
lasts but for a day.

No. The Pythagoreans do seem to give a more credible account of the
matter, who place “One” among the goods in their double list of goods
and bads:[12] which philosophers, in fact, Speusippus[13] seems to have
followed.

But of these matters let us speak at some other time. Now there is
plainly a loophole to object to what has been advanced, on the plea
that the theory I have attacked is not by its advocates applied to all
good: but those goods only are spoken of as being under one ἰδέα, which
are pursued, and with which men rest content simply for their own
sakes: whereas those things which have a tendency to produce or
preserve them in any way, or to hinder their contraries, are called
good because of these other goods, and after another fashion. It is
manifest then that the goods may be so called in two senses, the one
class for their own sakes, the other because of these.

Very well then, let us separate the independent goods from the
instrumental, and see whether they are spoken of as under one ἰδέα.
But the question next arises, what kind of goods are we to call
independent? All such as are pursued even when separated from other
goods, as, for instance, being wise, seeing, and certain pleasures and
honours (for these, though we do pursue them with some further end in
view, one would still place among the independent goods)? or does it
come in fact to this, that we can call nothing independent good except
the ἰδέα, and so the concrete of it will be nought?

If, on the other hand, these are independent goods, then we shall
require that the account of the goodness be the same clearly in all,
just as that of the whiteness is in snow and white lead. But how stands
the fact? Why of honour and wisdom and pleasure the accounts are
distinct and different in so far as they are good. The Chief Good then
is not something common, and after one ἰδέα.

But then, how does the name come to be common (for it is not seemingly
a case of fortuitous equivocation)? Are different individual things
called good by virtue of being from one source, or all conducing to one
end, or rather by way of analogy, for that intellect is to the soul as
sight to the body, and so on? However, perhaps we ought to leave these
questions now, for an accurate investigation of them is more properly
the business of a different philosophy. And likewise respecting the
ἰδέα: for even if there is some one good predicated in common of all
things that are good, or separable and capable of existing
independently, manifestly it cannot be the object of human action or
attainable by Man; but we are in search now of something that is
so.[14]

It may be readily occur to any one, that it would be better to attain a
knowledge of it with a view to such concrete goods as are attainable
and practical, because, with this as a kind of model in our hands, we
shall the better know what things are good for us individually, and
when we know them, we shall attain them.

Some plausibility, it is true, this argument possesses, but it is
contradicted by the facts of the Arts and Sciences; for all these,
though aiming at some good, and seeking that which is deficient, yet
pretermit the knowledge of it: now it is not exactly probable that all
artisans without exception should be ignorant of so great a help as
this would be, and not even look after it; neither is it easy to see
wherein a weaver or a carpenter will be profited in respect of his
craft by knowing the very-good, or how a man will be the more apt to
effect cures or to command an army for having seen the ἰδέα itself. For
manifestly it is not health after this general and abstract fashion
which is the subject of the physician’s investigation, but the health
of Man, or rather perhaps of this or that man; for he has to heal
individuals.—Thus much on these points.

Chapter IV.

And now let us revert to the Good of which we are in search: what can
it be? for manifestly it is different in different actions and arts:
for it is different in the healing art and in the art military, and
similarly in the rest. What then is the Chief Good in each? Is it not
“that for the sake of which the other things are done?” and this in the
healing art is health, and in the art military victory, and in that of
house-building a house, and in any other thing something else; in
short, in every action and moral choice the End, because in all cases
men do everything else with a view to this. So that if there is some
one End of all things which are and may be done, this must be the Good
proposed by doing, or if more than one, then these.

Thus our discussion after some traversing about has come to the same
point which we reached before. And this we must try yet more to clear
up.

Now since the ends are plainly many, and of these we choose some with a
view to others (wealth, for instance, musical instruments, and, in
general, all instruments), it is clear that all are not final: but the
Chief Good is manifestly something final; and so, if there is some one
only which is final, this must be the object of our search: but if
several, then the most final of them will be it.

Now that which is an object of pursuit in itself we call more final
than that which is so with a view to something else; that again which
is never an object of choice with a view to something else than those
which are so both in themselves and with a view to this ulterior
object: and so by the term “absolutely final,” we denote that which is
an object of choice always in itself, and never with a view to any
other.

And of this nature Happiness is mostly thought to be, for this we
choose always for its own sake, and never with a view to anything
further: whereas honour, pleasure, intellect, in fact every excellence
we choose for their own sakes, it is true (because we would choose each
of these even if no result were to follow), but we choose them also
with a view to happiness, conceiving that through their instrumentality
we shall be happy: but no man chooses happiness with a view to them,
nor in fact with a view to any other thing whatsoever.

The same result[15] is seen to follow also from the notion of
self-sufficiency, a quality thought to belong to the final good. Now by
sufficient for Self, we mean not for a single individual living a
solitary life, but for his parents also and children and wife, and, in
general, friends and countrymen; for man is by nature adapted to a
social existence. But of these, of course, some limit must be fixed:
for if one extends it to parents and descendants and friends’ friends,
there is no end to it. This point, however, must be left for future
investigation: for the present we define that to be self-sufficient
“which taken alone makes life choice-worthy, and to be in want of
nothing;” now of such kind we think Happiness to be: and further, to be
most choice-worthy of all things; not being reckoned with any other
thing,[16] for if it were so reckoned, it is plain we must then allow
it, with the addition of ever so small a good, to be more choice-worthy
than it was before:[17] because what is put to it becomes an addition of so
much more good, and of goods the greater is ever the more
choice-worthy.

So then Happiness is manifestly something final and self-sufficient,
being the end of all things which are and may be done.

Chapter V.

But, it may be, to call Happiness the Chief Good is a mere truism, and
what is wanted is some clearer account of its real nature. Now this
object may be easily attained, when we have discovered what is the work
of man; for as in the case of flute-player, statuary, or artisan of any
kind, or, more generally, all who have any work or course of action,
their Chief Good and Excellence is thought to reside in their work, so
it would seem to be with man, if there is any work belonging to him.

Are we then to suppose, that while carpenter and cobbler have certain
works and courses of action, Man as Man has none, but is left by Nature
without a work? or would not one rather hold, that as eye, hand, and
foot, and generally each of his members, has manifestly some special
work; so too the whole Man, as distinct from all these, has some work
of his own?[18]

What then can this be? not mere life, because that plainly is shared
with him even by vegetables, and we want what is peculiar to him. We
must separate off then the life of mere nourishment and growth, and
next will come the life of sensation: but this again manifestly is
common to horses, oxen, and every animal. There remains then a kind of
life of the Rational Nature apt to act: and of this Nature there are
two parts denominated Rational, the one as being obedient to Reason,
the other as having and exerting it. Again, as this life is also spoken
of in two ways,[19] we must take that which is in the way of actual
working, because this is thought to be most properly entitled to the
name. If then the work of Man is a working of the soul in accordance
with reason, or at least not independently of reason, and we say that
the work of any given subject, and of that subject good of its kind,
are the same in kind (as, for instance, of a harp-player and a good
harp-player, and so on in every case, adding to the work eminence in
the way of excellence; I mean, the work of a harp-player is to play the
harp, and of a good harp-player to play it well); if, I say, this is
so, and we assume the work of Man to be life of a certain kind, that is
to say a working of the soul, and actions with reason, and of a good
man to do these things well and nobly, and in fact everything is
finished off well in the way of the excellence which peculiarly belongs
to it: if all this is so, then the Good of Man comes to be “a working
of the Soul in the way of Excellence,” or, if Excellence admits of
degrees, in the way of the best and most perfect Excellence.

And we must add, ἐν βίῳ τελείῳ;[20] for as it is not one swallow or one
fine day that makes a spring, so it is not one day or a short time that
makes a man blessed and happy.

Let this then be taken for a rough sketch of the Chief Good: since it
is probably the right way to give first the outline, and fill it in
afterwards. And it would seem that any man may improve and connect what
is good in the sketch, and that time is a good discoverer and
co-operator in such matters: it is thus in fact that all improvements
in the various arts have been brought about, for any man may fill up a
deficiency.

You must remember also what has been already stated, and not seek for
exactness in all matters alike, but in each according to the
subject-matter, and so far as properly belongs to the system. The
carpenter and geometrician, for instance, enquire into the right line
in different fashion: the former so far as he wants it for his work,
the latter enquires into its nature and properties, because he is
concerned with the truth.

So then should one do in other matters, that the incidental matters may
not exceed the direct ones.

And again, you must not demand the reason either in all things
alike,[21] because in some it is sufficient that the fact has been well
demonstrated, which is the case with first principles; and the fact is
the first step, _i.e._ starting-point or principle.

And of these first principles some are obtained by induction, some by
perception,[22] some by a course of habituation, others in other
different ways. And we must try to trace up each in their own nature,
and take pains to secure their being well defined, because they have
great influence on what follows: it is thought, I mean, that the
starting-point or principle is more than half the whole matter, and
that many of the points of enquiry come simultaneously into view
thereby.

Chapter VI.

We must now enquire concerning Happiness, not only from our conclusion
and the data on which our reasoning proceeds, but likewise from what is
commonly said about it: because with what is true all things which
really are are in harmony, but with that which is false the true very
soon jars.

Now there is a common division of goods into three classes; one being
called external, the other two those of the soul and body respectively,
and those belonging to the soul we call most properly and specially
good. Well, in our definition we assume that the actions and workings
of the soul constitute Happiness, and these of course belong to the
soul. And so our account is a good one, at least according to this
opinion, which is of ancient date, and accepted by those who profess
philosophy. Rightly too are certain actions and workings said to be the
end, for thus it is brought into the number of the goods of the soul
instead of the external. Agreeing also with our definition is the
common notion, that the happy man lives well and does well, for it has
been stated by us to be pretty much a kind of living well and doing
well.

And further, the points required in Happiness are found in combination
in our account of it.

For some think it is virtue, others practical wisdom, others a kind of
scientific philosophy; others that it is these, or else some one of
them, in combination with pleasure, or at least not independently of
it; while others again take in external prosperity.

Of these opinions, some rest on the authority of numbers or antiquity,
others on that of few, and those men of note: and it is not likely that
either of these classes should be wrong in all points, but be right at
least in some one, or even in most.

Now with those who assert it to be Virtue (Excellence), or some kind of
Virtue, our account agrees: for working in the way of Excellence surely
belongs to Excellence.

And there is perhaps no unimportant difference between conceiving of
the Chief Good as in possession or as in use, in other words, as a mere
state or as a working. For the state or habit[23] may possibly exist in
a subject without effecting any good, as, for instance, in him who is
asleep, or in any other way inactive; but the working cannot so, for it
will of necessity act, and act well. And as at the Olympic games it is
not the finest and strongest men who are crowned, but they who enter
the lists, for out of these the prize-men are selected; so too in life,
of the honourable and the good, it is they who act who rightly win the
prizes.[24]

Their life too is in itself pleasant: for the feeling of pleasure is a
mental sensation, and that is to each pleasant of which he is said to
be fond: a horse, for instance, to him who is fond of horses, and a
sight to him who is fond of sights: and so in like manner just acts to
him who is fond of justice, and more generally the things in accordance
with virtue to him who is fond of virtue. Now in the case of the
multitude of men the things which they individually esteem pleasant
clash, because they are not such by nature, whereas to the lovers of
nobleness those things are pleasant which are such by nature: but the
actions in accordance with virtue are of this kind, so that they are
pleasant both to the individuals and also in themselves.

So then their life has no need of pleasure as a kind of additional
appendage, but involves pleasure in itself. For, besides what I have
just mentioned, a man is not a good man at all who feels no pleasure in
noble actions,[25] just as no one would call that man just who does not
feel pleasure in acting justly, or liberal who does not in liberal
actions, and similarly in the case of the other virtues which might be
enumerated: and if this be so, then the actions in accordance with
virtue must be in themselves pleasurable. Then again they are certainly
good and noble, and each of these in the highest degree; if we are to
take as right the judgment of the good man, for he judges as we have
said.

Thus then Happiness is most excellent, most noble, and most pleasant,
and these attributes are not separated as in the well-known Delian
inscription—

“Most noble is that which is most just, but best is health;
And naturally most pleasant is the obtaining one’s desires.”


For all these co-exist in the best acts of working: and we say that
Happiness is these, or one, that is, the best of them.

Still[26] it is quite plain that it does require the addition of
external goods, as we have said: because without appliances it is
impossible, or at all events not easy, to do noble actions: for
friends, money, and political influence are in a manner instruments
whereby many things are done: some things there are again a deficiency
in which mars blessedness; good birth, for instance, or fine offspring,
or even personal beauty: for he is not at all capable of Happiness who
is very ugly, or is ill-born, or solitary and childless; and still less
perhaps supposing him to have very bad children or friends, or to have
lost good ones by death. As we have said already, the addition of
prosperity of this kind does seem necessary to complete the idea of
Happiness; hence some rank good fortune, and others virtue, with
Happiness.

Chapter VII.

And hence too a question is raised, whether it is a thing that can be
learned, or acquired by habituation or discipline of some other kind,
or whether it comes in the way of divine dispensation, or even in the
way of chance.

Now to be sure, if anything else is a gift of the Gods to men, it is
probable that Happiness is a gift of theirs too, and specially because
of all human goods it is the highest. But this, it may be, is a
question belonging more properly to an investigation different from
ours:[27] and it is quite clear, that on the supposition of its not
being sent from the Gods direct, but coming to us by reason of virtue
and learning of a certain kind, or discipline, it is yet one of the
most Godlike things; because the prize and End of virtue is manifestly
somewhat most excellent, nay divine and blessed.

It will also on this supposition be widely participated, for it may
through learning and diligence of a certain kind exist in all who have
not been maimed[28] for virtue.

And if it is better we should be happy thus than as a result of chance,
this is in itself an argument that the case is so; because those things
which are in the way of nature, and in like manner of art, and of every
cause, and specially the best cause, are by nature in the best way
possible: to leave them to chance what is greatest and most noble would
be very much out of harmony with all these facts.[29]

The question may be determined also by a reference to our definition of
Happiness, that it is a working of the soul in the way of excellence or
virtue of a certain kind: and of the other goods, some we must have to
begin with, and those which are co-operative and useful are given by
nature as instruments.[30]

These considerations will harmonise also with what we said at the
commencement: for we assumed the End of πολιτικὴ to be most excellent:
now this bestows most care on making the members of the community of a
certain character; good that is and apt to do what is honourable.

With good reason then neither ox nor horse nor any other brute animal
do we call happy, for none of them can partake in such working: and for
this same reason a child is not happy either, because by reason of his
tender age he cannot yet perform such actions: if the term is applied,
it is by way of anticipation.

For to constitute Happiness, there must be, as we have said, complete
virtue and a complete life: for many changes and chances of all kinds
arise during a life, and he who is most prosperous may become involved
in great misfortunes in his old age, as in the heroic poems the tale is
told of Priam: but the man who has experienced such fortune and died in
wretchedness, no man calls happy.

Chapter VIII.

Are we then to call no man happy while he lives, and, as Solon would
have us, look to the end? And again, if we are to maintain this
position, is a man then happy when he is dead? or is not this a
complete absurdity, specially in us who say Happiness is a working of a
certain kind?

If on the other hand we do not assert that the dead man is happy, and
Solon does not mean this, but only that one would then be safe in
pronouncing a man happy, as being thenceforward out of the reach of
evils and misfortunes, this too admits of some dispute, since it is
thought that the dead has somewhat both of good and evil (if, as we
must allow, a man may have when alive but not aware of the
circumstances), as honour and dishonour, and good and bad fortune of
children and descendants generally.

Nor is this view again without its difficulties: for, after a man has
lived in blessedness to old age and died accordingly, many changes may
befall him in right of his descendants; some of them may be good and
obtain positions in life accordant to their merits, others again quite
the contrary: it is plain too that the descendants may at different
intervals or grades stand in all manner of relations to the
ancestors.[31] Absurd indeed would be the position that even the dead
man is to change about with them and become at one time happy and at
another miserable. Absurd however it is on the other hand that the
affairs of the descendants should in no degree and during no time
affect the ancestors.

But we must revert to the point first raised,[32] since the present
question will be easily determined from that.

If then we are to look to the end and then pronounce the man blessed,
not as being so but as having been so at some previous time, surely it
is absurd that when he _is_ happy the truth is not to be asserted of
him, because we are unwilling to pronounce the living happy by reason
of their liability to changes, and because, whereas we have conceived
of happiness as something stable and no way easily changeable, the fact
is that good and bad fortune are constantly circling about the same
people: for it is quite plain, that if we are to depend upon the
fortunes of men, we shall often have to call the same man happy, and a
little while after miserable, thus representing our happy man,

“Chameleon-like, and based on rottenness.”


Is not this the solution? that to make our sentence dependent on the
changes of fortune, is no way right: for not in them stands the well,
or the ill, but though human life needs these as accessories (which we
have allowed already), the workings in the way of virtue are what
determine Happiness, and the contrary the contrary.

And, by the way, the question which has been here discussed, testifies
incidentally to the truth of our account of Happiness.[33] For to
nothing does a stability of human results attach so much as it does to
the workings in the way of virtue, since these are held to be more
abiding even than the sciences: and of these last again[34] the most
precious are the most abiding, because the blessed live in them most
and most continuously, which seems to be the reason why they are not
forgotten. So then this stability which is sought will be in the happy
man, and he will be such through life, since always, or most of all, he
will be doing and contemplating the things which are in the way of
virtue: and the various chances of life he will bear most nobly, and at
all times and in all ways harmoniously, since he is the truly good man,
or in the terms of our proverb “a faultless cube.”

And whereas the incidents of chance are many, and differ in greatness
and smallness, the small pieces of good or ill fortune evidently do not
affect the balance of life, but the great and numerous, if happening
for good, will make life more blessed (for it is their nature to
contribute to ornament, and the using of them comes to be noble and
excellent), but if for ill, they bruise as it were and maim the
blessedness: for they bring in positive pain, and hinder many acts of
working. But still, even in these, nobleness shines through when a man
bears contentedly many and great mischances not from insensibility to
pain but because he is noble and high-spirited.

And if, as we have said, the acts of working are what determine the
character of the life, no one of the blessed can ever become wretched,
because he will never do those things which are hateful and mean. For
the man who is truly good and sensible bears all fortunes, we presume,
becomingly, and always does what is noblest under the circumstances,
just as a good general employs to the best advantage the force he has
with him; or a good shoemaker makes the handsomest shoe he can out of
the leather which has been given him; and all other good artisans
likewise. And if this be so, wretched never can the happy man come to
be: I do not mean to say he will be blessed should he fall into
fortunes like those of Priam.

Nor, in truth, is he shifting and easily changeable, for on the one
hand from his happiness he will not be shaken easily nor by ordinary
mischances, but, if at all, by those which are great and numerous; and,
on the other, after such mischances he cannot regain his happiness in a
little time; but, if at all, in a long and complete period, during
which he has made himself master of great and noble things.

Why then should we not call happy the man who works in the way of
perfect virtue, and is furnished with external goods sufficient for
acting his part in the drama of life:[35] and this during no ordinary
period but such as constitutes a complete life as we have been
describing it.

Or we must add, that not only is he to live so, but his death must be
in keeping with such life, since the future is dark to us, and
Happiness we assume to be in every way an end and complete. And, if
this be so, we shall call them among the living blessed who have and
will have the things specified, but blessed _as Men_.[36]

On these points then let it suffice to have denned thus much.

Chapter IX.

Now that the fortunes of their descendants, and friends generally,
contribute nothing towards forming the condition of the dead, is
plainly a very heartless notion, and contrary to the current opinions.

But since things which befall are many, and differ in all kinds of
ways, and some touch more nearly, others less, to go into minute
particular distinctions would evidently be a long and endless task: and
so it may suffice to speak generally and in outline.

If then, as of the misfortunes which happen to one’s self, some have a
certain weight and turn the balance of life, while others are, so to
speak, lighter; so it is likewise with those which befall all our
friends alike; if further, whether they whom each suffering befalls be
alive or dead makes much more difference than in a tragedy the
presupposing or actual perpetration of the various crimes and horrors,
we must take into our account this difference also, and still more
perhaps the doubt concerning the dead whether they really partake of
any good or evil; it seems to result from all these considerations,
that if anything does pierce the veil and reach them, be the same good
or bad, it must be something trivial and small, either in itself or to
them; or at least of such a magnitude or such a kind as neither to make
happy them that are not so otherwise, nor to deprive of their
blessedness them that are.[37]

It is plain then that the good or ill fortunes of their friends do
affect the dead somewhat: but in such kind and degree as neither to
make the happy unhappy nor produce any other such effect.

Chapter X.

Having determined these points, let us examine with respect to
Happiness, whether it belongs to the class of things praiseworthy or
things precious; for to that of faculties[38] it evidently does not.

Now it is plain that everything which is a subject of praise is praised
for being of a certain kind and bearing a certain relation to something
else: for instance, the just, and the valiant, and generally the good
man, and virtue itself, we praise because of the actions and the
results: and the strong man, and the quick runner, and so forth, we
praise for being of a certain nature and bearing a certain relation to
something good and excellent (and this is illustrated by attempts to
praise the gods; for they are presented in a ludicrous aspect[39] by
being referred to our standard, and this results from the fact, that
all praise does, as we have said, imply reference to a standard). Now
if it is to such objects that praise belongs, it is evident that what
is applicable to the best objects is not praise, but something higher
and better: which is plain matter of fact, for not only do we call the
gods blessed and happy, but of men also we pronounce those blessed who
most nearly resemble the gods. And in like manner in respect of goods;
no man thinks of praising Happiness as he does the principle of
justice, but calls it blessed, as being somewhat more godlike and more
excellent.

Eudoxus[40] too is thought to have advanced a sound argument in support
of the claim of pleasure to the highest prize: for the fact that,
though it is one of the good things, it is not praised, he took for an
indication of its superiority to those which are subjects of praise: a
superiority he attributed also to a god and the Chief Good, on the
ground that they form the standard to which everything besides is
referred. For praise applies to virtue, because it makes men apt to do
what is noble; but encomia to definite works of body or mind.[41]

However, it is perhaps more suitable to a regular treatise on encomia
to pursue this topic with exactness: it is enough for our purpose that
from what has been said it is evident that Happiness belongs to the
class of things precious and final. And it seems to be so also because
of its being a starting-point; which it is, in that with a view to it
we all do everything else that is done; now the starting-point and
cause of good things we assume to be something precious and divine.

Chapter XI.

Moreover, since Happiness is a kind of working of the soul in the way
of perfect Excellence, we must enquire concerning Excellence: for so
probably shall we have a clearer view concerning Happiness; and again,
he who is really a statesman is generally thought to have spent most
pains on this, for he wishes to make the citizens good and obedient to
the laws. (For examples of this class we have the lawgivers of the
Cretans and Lacedæmonians and whatever other such there have been.)
But if this investigation belongs properly to πολιτικὴ, then clearly
the enquiry will be in accordance with our original design.

Well, we are to enquire concerning Excellence, _i.e._ Human Excellence
of course, because it was the Chief Good of Man and the Happiness of
Man that we were enquiring of just now.

And by Human Excellence we mean not that of man’s body but that of his
soul; for we call Happiness a working of the Soul.

And if this is so, it is plain that some knowledge of the nature of the
Soul is necessary for the statesman, just as for the oculist a
knowledge of the whole body, and the more so in proportion as πολιτικὴ
is more precious and higher than the healing art: and in fact
physicians of the higher class do busy themselves much with the
knowledge of the body.

So then the statesman is to consider the nature of the Soul: but he
must do so with these objects in view, and so far only as may suffice
for the objects of his special enquiry: for to carry his speculations
to a greater exactness is perhaps a task more laborious than falls
within his province.

In fact, the few statements made on the subject in my popular treatises
are quite enough, and accordingly we will adopt them here: as, that the
Soul consists of two parts, the Irrational and the Rational (as to
whether these are actually divided, as are the parts of the body, and
everything that is capable of division; or are only metaphysically
speaking two, being by nature inseparable, as are convex and concave
circumferences, matters not in respect of our present purpose). And of
the Irrational, the one part seems common to other objects, and in fact
vegetative; I mean the cause of nourishment and growth (for such a
faculty of the Soul one would assume to exist in all things that
receive nourishment, even in embryos, and this the same as in the
perfect creatures; for this is more likely than that it should be a
different one).

Now the Excellence of this manifestly is not peculiar to the human
species but common to others: for this part and this faculty is thought
to work most in time of sleep, and the good and bad man are least
distinguishable while asleep; whence it is a common saying that during
one half of life there is no difference between the happy and the
wretched; and this accords with our anticipations, for sleep is an
inactivity of the soul, in so far as it is denominated good or bad,
except that in some wise some of its movements find their way through
the veil and so the good come to have better dreams than ordinary men.
But enough of this: we must forego any further mention of the nutritive
part, since it is not naturally capable of the Excellence which is
peculiarly human.

And there seems to be another Irrational Nature of the Soul, which yet
in a way partakes of Reason. For in the man who controls his appetites,
and in him who resolves to do so and fails, we praise the Reason or
Rational part of the Soul, because it exhorts aright and to the best
course: but clearly there is in them, beside the Reason, some other
natural principle which fights with and strains against the Reason.
(For in plain terms, just as paralysed limbs of the body when their
owners would move them to the right are borne aside in a contrary
direction to the left, so is it in the case of the Soul, for the
impulses of men who cannot control their appetites are to contrary
points: the difference is that in the case of the body we do see what
is borne aside but in the case of the soul we do not. But, it may be,
not the less[42] on that account are we to suppose that there is in the
Soul also somewhat besides the Reason, which is opposed to this and
goes against it; as to _how_ it is different, that is irrelevant.)

But of Reason this too does evidently partake, as we have said: for
instance, in the man of self-control it obeys Reason: and perhaps in
the man of perfected self-mastery,[43] or the brave man, it is yet
more obedient; in them it agrees entirely with the Reason.

So then the Irrational is plainly twofold: the one part, the merely
vegetative, has no share of Reason, but that of desire, or appetition
generally, does partake of it in a sense, in so far as it is obedient
to it and capable of submitting to its rule. (So too in common phrase
we say we have λόγος of our father or friends, and this in a different
sense from that in which we say we have λόγος of mathematics.)[44]

Now that the Irrational is in some way persuaded by the Reason,
admonition, and every act of rebuke and exhortation indicate. If then
we are to say that this also has Reason, then the Rational, as well as
the Irrational, will be twofold, the one supremely and in itself, the
other paying it a kind of filial regard.

The Excellence of Man then is divided in accordance with this
difference: we make two classes, calling the one Intellectual, and the
other Moral; pure science, intelligence, and practical
wisdom—Intellectual: liberality, and perfected self-mastery—Moral: in
speaking of a man’s Moral character, we do not say he is a scientific
or intelligent but a meek man, or one of perfected self-mastery: and we
praise the man of science in right of his mental state;[45] and of
these such as are praiseworthy we call Excellences.




BOOK II

Chapter I.


Well: human Excellence is of two kinds, Intellectual and Moral:[1] now
the Intellectual springs originally, and is increased subsequently,
from teaching (for the most part that is[2]), and needs therefore
experience and time; whereas the Moral comes from custom, and so the
Greek term denoting it is but a slight deflection from the term
denoting custom in that language.

From this fact it is plain that not one of the Moral Virtues comes to
be in us merely by nature: because of such things as exist by nature,
none can be changed by custom: a stone, for instance, by nature
gravitating downwards, could never by custom be brought to ascend, not
even if one were to try and accustom it by throwing it up ten thousand
times; nor could file again be brought to descend, nor in fact could
anything whose nature is in one way be brought by custom to be in
another. The Virtues then come to be in us neither by nature, nor in
despite of nature,[3] but we are furnished by nature with a capacity
for receiving themu and are perfected in them through custom.

Again, in whatever cases we get things by nature, we get the faculties
first and perform the acts of working afterwards; an illustration of
which is afforded by the case of our bodily senses, for it was not from
having often seen or heard that we got these senses, but just the
reverse: we had them and so exercised them, but did not have them
because we had exercised them. But the Virtues we get by first
performing single acts of working, which, again, is the case of other
things, as the arts for instance; for what we have to make when we have
learned how, these we learn how to make by making: men come to be
builders, for instance, by building; harp-players, by playing on the
harp: exactly so, by doing just actions we come to be just; by doing
the actions of self-mastery we come to be perfected in self-mastery;
and by doing brave actions brave.

And to the truth of this testimony is borne by what takes place in
communities: because the law-givers make the individual members good
men by habituation, and this is the intention certainly of every
law-giver, and all who do not effect it well fail of their intent; and
herein consists the difference between a good Constitution and a bad.

Again, every Virtue is either produced or destroyed from and by the
very same circumstances: art too in like manner; I mean it is by
playing the harp that both the good and the bad harp-players are
formed: and similarly builders and all the rest; by building well men
will become good builders; by doing it badly bad ones: in fact, if this
had not been so, there would have been no need of instructors, but all
men would have been at once good or bad in their several arts without
them.

So too then is it with the Virtues: for by acting in the various
relations in which we are thrown with our fellow men, we come to be,
some just, some unjust: and by acting in dangerous positions and being
habituated to feel fear or confidence, we come to be, some brave,
others cowards.

Similarly is it also with respect to the occasions of lust and anger:
for some men come to be perfected in self-mastery and mild, others
destitute of all self-control and passionate; the one class by behaving
in one way under them, the other by behaving in another. Or, in one
word, the habits are produced from the acts of working like to them:
and so what we have to do is to give a certain character to these
particular acts, because the habits formed correspond to the
differences of these.

So then, whether we are accustomed this way or that straight from
childhood, makes not a small but an important difference, or rather I
would say it makes all the difference.

Chapter II.

Since then the object of the present treatise is not mere speculation,
as it is of some others (for we are enquiring not merely that we may
know what virtue is but that we may become virtuous, else it would have
been useless), we must consider as to the particular actions how we are
to do them, because, as we have just said, the quality of the habits
that shall be formed depends on these.

Now, that we are to act in accordance with Right Reason is a general
maxim, and may for the present be taken for granted: we will speak of
it hereafter, and say both what Right Reason is, and what are its
relations to the other virtues.[4]

But let this point be first thoroughly understood between us, that all
which can be said on moral action must be said in outline, as it were,
and not exactly: for as we remarked at the commencement, such reasoning
only must be required as the nature of the subject-matter admits of,
and matters of moral action and expediency have no fixedness any more
than matters of health. And if the subject in its general maxims is
such, still less in its application to particular cases is exactness
attainable:[5] because these fall not under any art or system of rules,
but it must be left in each instance to the individual agents to look
to the exigencies of the particular case, as it is in the art of
healing, or that of navigating a ship. Still, though the present
subject is confessedly such, we must try and do what we can for it.

First then this must be noted, that it is the nature of such things to
be spoiled by defect and excess; as we see in the case of health and
strength (since for the illustration of things which cannot be seen we
must use those that can), for excessive training impairs the strength
as well as deficient: meat and drink, in like manner, in too great or
too small quantities, impair the health: while in due proportion they
cause, increase, and preserve it.

Thus it is therefore with the habits of perfected Self-Mastery and
Courage and the rest of the Virtues: for the man who flies from and
fears all things, and never stands up against anything, comes to be a
coward; and he who fears nothing, but goes at everything, comes to be
rash. In like manner too, he that tastes of every pleasure and abstains
from none comes to lose all self-control; while he who avoids all, as
do the dull and clownish, comes as it were to lose his faculties of
perception: that is to say, the habits of perfected Self-Mastery and
Courage are spoiled by the excess and defect, but by the mean state are
preserved.

Furthermore, not only do the origination, growth, and marring of the
habits come from and by the same circumstances, but also the acts of
working after the habits are formed will be exercised on the same: for
so it is also with those other things which are more directly matters
of sight, strength for instance: for this comes by taking plenty of
food and doing plenty of work, and the man who has attained strength is
best able to do these: and so it is with the Virtues, for not only do
we by abstaining from pleasures come to be perfected in Self-Mastery,
but when we have come to be so we can best abstain from them: similarly
too with Courage: for it is by accustoming ourselves to despise objects
of fear and stand up against them that we come to be brave; and after
we have come to be so we shall be best able to stand up against such
objects.

And for a test of the formation of the habits we must take the pleasure
or pain which succeeds the acts; for he is perfected in Self-Mastery
who not only abstains from the bodily pleasures but is glad to do so;
whereas he who abstains but is sorry to do it has not Self-Mastery: he
again is brave who stands up against danger, either with positive
pleasure or at least without any pain; whereas he who does it with pain
is not brave.[6]

For Moral Virtue has for its object-matter pleasures and pains, because
by reason of pleasure we do what is bad, and by reason of pain decline
doing what is right (for which cause, as Plato observes, men should
have been trained straight from their childhood to receive pleasure and
pain from proper objects, for this is the right education). Again:
since Virtues have to do with actions and feelings, and on every
feeling and every action pleasure and pain follow, here again is
another proof that Virtue has for its object-matter pleasure and pain.
The same is shown also by the fact that punishments are effected
through the instrumentality of these; because they are of the nature of
remedies, and it is the nature of remedies to be the contraries of the
ills they cure. Again, to quote what we said before: every habit of the
Soul by its very nature has relation to, and exerts itself upon, things
of the same kind as those by which it is naturally deteriorated or
improved: now such habits do come to be vicious by reason of pleasures
and pains, that is, by men pursuing or avoiding respectively, either
such as they ought not, or at wrong times, or in wrong manner, and so
forth (for which reason, by the way, some people define the Virtues as
certain states of impassibility and utter quietude,[7] but they are
wrong because they speak without modification, instead of adding “as
they ought,” “as they ought not,” and “when,” and so on). Virtue then
is assumed to be that habit which is such, in relation to pleasures and
pains, as to effect the best results, and Vice the contrary.

The following considerations may also serve to set this in a clear
light. There are principally three things moving us to choice and three
to avoidance, the honourable, the expedient, the pleasant; and their
three contraries, the dishonourable, the hurtful, and the painful: now
the good man is apt to go right, and the bad man wrong, with respect to
all these of course, but most specially with respect to pleasure:
because not only is this common to him with all animals but also it is
a concomitant of all those things which move to choice, since both the
honourable and the expedient give an impression of pleasure.

Again, it grows up with us all from infancy, and so it is a hard matter
to remove from ourselves this feeling, engrained as it is into our very
life.

Again, we adopt pleasure and pain (some of us more, and some less) as
the measure even of actions: for this cause then our whole business
must be with them, since to receive right or wrong impressions of
pleasure and pain is a thing of no little importance in respect of the
actions. Once more; it is harder, as Heraclitus says, to fight against
pleasure than against anger: now it is about that which is more than
commonly difficult that art comes into being, and virtue too, because
in that which is difficult the good is of a higher order: and so for
this reason too both virtue and moral philosophy generally must wholly
busy themselves respecting pleasures and pains, because he that uses
these well will be good, he that does so ill will be bad.

Let us then be understood to have stated, that Virtue has for its
object-matter pleasures and pains, and that it is either increased or
marred by the same circumstances (differently used) by which it is
originally generated, and that it exerts itself on the same
circumstances out of which it was generated.

Chapter III.

Now I can conceive a person perplexed as to the meaning of our
statement, that men must do just actions to become just, and those of
self-mastery to acquire the habit of self-mastery; “for,” he would say,
“if men are doing the actions they have the respective virtues already,
just as men are grammarians or musicians when they do the actions of
either art.” May we not reply by saying that it is not so even in the
case of the arts referred to: because a man may produce something
grammatical either by chance or the suggestion of another; but then
only will he be a grammarian when he not only produces something
grammatical but does so grammarian-wise, _i.e._ in virtue of the
grammatical knowledge he himself possesses.

Again, the cases of the arts and the virtues are not parallel: because
those things which are produced by the arts have their excellence in
themselves, and it is sufficient therefore that these when produced
should be in a certain state: but those which are produced in the way
of the virtues, are, strictly speaking, actions of a certain kind (say
of Justice or perfected Self-Mastery), not merely if in themselves they
are in a certain state but if also he who does them does them being
himself in a certain state, first if knowing what he is doing, next if
with deliberate preference, and with such preference for the things’
own sake; and thirdly if being himself stable and unapt to change. Now
to constitute possession of the arts these requisites are not reckoned
in, excepting the one point of knowledge: whereas for possession of the
virtues knowledge avails little or nothing, but the other requisites
avail not a little, but, in fact, are all in all, and these requisites
as a matter of fact do come from oftentimes doing the actions of
Justice and perfected Self-Mastery.

The facts,[8] it is true, are called by the names of these habits when
they are such as the just or perfectly self-mastering man would do; but
he is not in possession of the virtues who merely does these facts, but
he who also so does them as the just and self-mastering do them.

We are right then in saying, that these virtues are formed in a man by
his doing the actions; but no one, if he should leave them undone,
would be even in the way to become a good man. Yet people in general do
not perform these actions, but taking refuge in talk they flatter
themselves they are philosophising, and that they will so be good men:
acting in truth very like those sick people who listen to the doctor
with great attention but do nothing that he tells them: just as these
then cannot be well bodily under such a course of treatment, so neither
can those be mentally by such philosophising.

Chapter IV.

Next, we must examine what Virtue is.[9] Well, since the things which
come to be in the mind are, in all, of three kinds, Feelings,
Capacities, States, Virtue of course must belong to one of the three
classes.

By Feelings, I mean such as lust, anger, fear, confidence, envy, joy,
friendship, hatred, longing, emulation, compassion, in short all such
as are followed by pleasure or pain: by Capacities, those in right of
which we are said to be capable of these feelings; as by virtue of
which we are able to have been made angry, or grieved, or to have
compassionated; by States, those in right of which we are in a certain
relation good or bad to the feelings; to having been made angry, for
instance, we are in a wrong relation if in our anger we were too
violent or too slack, but if we were in the happy medium we are in a
right relation to the feeling. And so on of the rest.

Now Feelings neither the virtues nor vices are, because in right of the
Feelings we are not denominated either good or bad, but in right of the
virtues and vices we are.

Again, in right of the Feelings we are neither praised nor blamed,[10]
(for a man is not commended for being afraid or being angry, nor blamed
for being angry merely but for being so in a particular way), but in
right of the virtues and vices we are.

Again, both anger and fear we feel without moral choice, whereas the
virtues are acts of moral choice, or at least certainly not independent
of it.

Moreover, in right of the Feelings we are said to be moved, but in
right of the virtues and vices not to be moved, but disposed, in a
certain way.

And for these same reasons they are not Capacities, for we are not
called good or bad merely because we are able to feel, nor are we
praised or blamed.

And again, Capacities we have by nature, but we do not come to be good
or bad by nature, as we have said before.

Since then the virtues are neither Feelings nor Capacities, it remains
that they must be States.

Chapter V.

Now what the genus of Virtue is has been said; but we must not merely
speak of it thus, that it is a state but say also what kind of a state
it is.

We must observe then that all excellence makes that whereof it is the
excellence both to be itself in a good state and to perform its work
well. The excellence of the eye, for instance, makes both the eye good
and its work also: for by the excellence of the eye we see well. So too
the excellence of the horse makes a horse good, and good in speed, and
in carrying his rider, and standing up against the enemy. If then this
is universally the case, the excellence of Man, i.e. Virtue, must be a
state whereby Man comes to be good and whereby he will perform well his
proper work. Now how this shall be it is true we have said already, but
still perhaps it may throw light on the subject to see what is its
characteristic nature.

In all quantity then, whether continuous or discrete,[11] one may take
the greater part, the less, or the exactly equal, and these either with
reference to the thing itself, or relatively to us: and the exactly
equal is a mean between excess and defect. Now by the mean of the
thing, _i.e._ absolute mean, I denote that which is equidistant from
either extreme (which of course is one and the same to all), and by the
mean relatively to ourselves, that which is neither too much nor too
little for the particular individual. This of course is not one nor the
same to all: for instance, suppose ten is too much and two too little,
people take six for the absolute mean; because it exceeds the smaller
sum by exactly as much as it is itself exceeded by the larger, and this
mean is according to arithmetical proportion.[12]

But the mean relatively to ourselves must not be so found ; for it does
not follow, supposing ten minæ[13] is too large a quantity to eat and
two too small, that the trainer will order his man six; because for the
person who is to take it this also may be too much or too little: for
Milo it would be too little, but for a man just commencing his athletic
exercises too much: similarly too of the exercises themselves, as
running or wrestling.

So then it seems every one possessed of skill avoids excess and defect,
but seeks for and chooses the mean, not the absolute but the relative.

Now if all skill thus accomplishes well its work by keeping an eye on
the mean, and bringing the works to this point (whence it is common
enough to say of such works as are in a good state, “one cannot add to
or take ought from them,” under the notion of excess or defect
destroying goodness but the mean state preserving it), and good
artisans, as we say, work with their eye on this, and excellence, like
nature, is more exact and better than any art in the world, it must
have an aptitude to aim at the mean.

It is moral excellence, _i.e._ Virtue, of course which I mean, because
this it is which is concerned with feelings and actions, and in these
there can be excess and defect and the mean: it is possible, for
instance, to feel the emotions of fear, confidence, lust, anger,
compassion, and pleasure and pain generally, too much or too little,
and in either case wrongly; but to feel them when we ought, on what
occasions, towards whom, why, and as, we should do, is the mean, or in
other words the best state, and this is the property of Virtue.

In like manner too with respect to the actions, there may be excess and
defect and the mean. Now Virtue is concerned with feelings and actions,
in which the excess is wrong and the defect is blamed but the mean is
praised and goes right; and both these circumstances belong to Virtue.
Virtue then is in a sense a mean state, since it certainly has an
aptitude for aiming at the mean.

Again, one may go wrong in many different ways (because, as the
Pythagoreans expressed it, evil is of the class of the infinite, good
of the finite), but right only in one; and so the former is easy, the
latter difficult; easy to miss the mark, but hard to hit it: and for
these reasons, therefore, both the excess and defect belong to Vice,
and the mean state to Virtue; for, as the poet has it,

“Men may be bad in many ways,
But good in one alone.”

Chapter VI.

Virtue then is “a state apt to exercise deliberate choice, being in the
relative mean, determined by reason, and[14] as the man of practical
wisdom would determine.”

It is a middle state between too faulty ones, in the way of excess on
one side and of defect on the other: and it is so moreover, because the
faulty states on one side fall short of, and those on the other exceed,
what is right, both in the case of the feelings and the actions; but
Virtue finds, and when found adopts, the mean.

And so, viewing it in respect of its essence and definition, Virtue is
a mean state; but in reference to the chief good and to excellence it
is the highest state possible.

But it must not be supposed that every action or every feeling is
capable of subsisting in this mean state, because some there are which
are so named as immediately to convey the notion of badness, as
malevolence, shamelessness, envy; or, to instance in actions, adultery,
theft, homicide; for all these and suchlike are blamed because they are
in themselves bad, not the having too much or too little of them.

In these then you never can go right, but must always be wrong: nor in
such does the right or wrong depend on the selection of a proper
person, time, or manner (take adultery for instance), but simply doing
any one soever of those things is being wrong.

You might as well require that there should be determined a mean state,
an excess and a defect in respect of acting unjustly, being cowardly,
or giving up all control of the passions: for at this rate there will
be of excess and defect a mean state; of excess, excess; and of defect,
defect.

But just as of perfected self-mastery and courage there is no excess
and defect, because the mean is in one point of view the highest
possible state, so neither of those faulty states can you have a mean
state, excess, or defect, but howsoever done they are wrong: you
cannot, in short, have of excess and defect a mean state, nor of a mean
state excess and defect.

Chapter VII.

It is not enough, however, to state this in general terms, we must also
apply it to particular instances, because in treatises on moral conduct
general statements have an air of vagueness, but those which go into
detail one of greater reality: for the actions after all must be in
detail, and the general statements, to be worth anything, must hold
good here.

We must take these details then from the well-known scheme.[15]

I. In respect of fears and confidence or boldness:

The Mean state is Courage: men may exceed, of course, either in absence
of fear or in positive confidence: the former has no name (which is a
common case), the latter is called rash: again, the man who has too
much fear and too little confidence is called a coward.

II. In respect of pleasures and pains (but not all, and perhaps fewer
pains than pleasures):

The Mean state here is perfected Self-Mastery, the defect total absence
of Self-control. As for defect in respect of pleasure, there are really
no people who are chargeable with it, so, of course, there is really no
name for such characters, but, as they are conceivable, we will give
them one and call them insensible.

III. In respect of giving and taking wealth[16] (_a_):

The mean state is Liberality, the excess Prodigality, the defect
Stinginess: here each of the extremes involves really an excess and
defect contrary to each other: I mean, the prodigal gives out too much
and takes in too little, while the stingy man takes in too much and
gives out too little. (It must be understood that we are now giving
merely an outline and summary, intentionally: and we will, in a later
part of the treatise, draw out the distinctions with greater
exactness.)

IV. In respect of wealth (b):

There are other dispositions besides these just mentioned; a mean state
called Munificence (for the munificent man differs from the liberal,
the former having necessarily to do with great wealth, the latter with
but small); the excess called by the names either of Want of taste or
Vulgar Profusion, and the defect Paltriness (these also differ from the
extremes connected with liberality, and the manner of their difference
shall also be spoken of later).

V. In respect of honour and dishonour (a):

The mean state Greatness of Soul, the excess which may be called
χαυνότης,[17] and the defect Littleness of Soul.

VI. In respect of honour and dishonour (b):

Now there is a state bearing the same relation to Greatness of Soul as
we said just now Liberality does to Munificence, with the difference
that is of being about a small amount of the same thing: this state
having reference to small honour, as Greatness of Soul to great honour;
a man may, of course, grasp at honour either more than he should or
less; now he that exceeds in his grasping at it is called ambitious, he
that falls short unambitious, he that is just as he should be has no
proper name: nor in fact have the states, except that the disposition
of the ambitious man is called ambition. For this reason those who are
in either extreme lay claim to the mean as a debateable land, and we
call the virtuous character sometimes by the name ambitious,[18]
sometimes by that of unambitious, and we commend sometimes the one and
sometimes the other. Why we do it shall be said in the subsequent part
of the treatise; but now we will go on with the rest of the virtues
after the plan we have laid down.

VII. In respect of anger:

Here too there is excess, defect, and a mean state; but since they may
be said to have really no proper names, as we call the virtuous
character Meek, we will call the mean state Meekness, and of the
extremes, let the man who is excessive be denominated Passionate, and
the faulty state Passionateness, and him who is deficient Angerless,
and the defect Angerlessness.

There are also three other mean states, having some mutual resemblance,
but still with differences; they are alike in that they all have for
their object-matter intercourse of words and deeds, and they differ in
that one has respect to truth herein, the other two to what is
pleasant; and this in two ways, the one in relaxation and amusement,
the other in all things which occur in daily life. We must say a word
or two about these also, that we may the better see that in all matters
the mean is praiseworthy, while the extremes are neither right nor
worthy of praise but of blame.

Now of these, it is true, the majority have really no proper names, but
still we must try, as in the other cases, to coin some for them for the
sake of clearness and intelligibleness.

I. In respect of truth:

 The man who is in the mean state we will call Truthful, and his state
 Truthfulness, and as to the disguise of truth, if it be on the side of
 exaggeration, Braggadocia, and him that has it a Braggadocio; if on
 that of diminution, Reserve and Reserved shall be the terms.

II. In respect of what is pleasant in the way of relaxation or
amusement.

The mean state shall be called Easy-pleasantry, and the character
accordingly a man of Easy-pleasantry; the excess Buffoonery, and the
man a Buffoon; the man deficient herein a Clown, and his state
Clownishness.

III. In respect of what is pleasant in daily life.

He that is is as he should be may be called Friendly, and his mean state
Friendliness: he that exceeds, if it be without any interested motive,
somewhat too Complaisant, if with such motive, a Flatterer: he that is
deficient and in all instances unpleasant, Quarrelsome and Cross.

There are mean states likewise in feelings and matters concerning them.
Shamefacedness, for instance, is no virtue, still a man is praised for
being shamefaced: for in these too the one is denominated the man in
the mean state, the other in the excess; the Dumbfoundered, for
instance, who is overwhelmed with shame on all and any occasions: the
man who is in the defect, _i.e._ who has no shame at all in his
composition, is called Shameless: but the right character Shamefaced.

Indignation against successful vice,[19] again, is a state in the mean
between Envy and Malevolence: they all three have respect to pleasure
and pain produced by what happens to one’s neighbour: for the man who
has this right feeling is annoyed at undeserved success of others,
while the envious man goes beyond him and is annoyed at all success of
others, and the malevolent falls so far short of feeling annoyance that
he even rejoices [at misfortune of others].

But for the discussion of these also there will be another opportunity,
as of Justice too, because the term is used in more senses than one. So
after this we will go accurately into each and say how they are mean
states: and in like manner also with respect to the Intellectual
Excellences.

Chapter VIII.

Now as there are three states in each case, two faulty either in the
way of excess or defect, and one right, which is the mean state, of
course all are in a way opposed to one another; the extremes, for
instance, not only to the mean but also to one another, and the mean to
the extremes: for just as the half is greater if compared with the less
portion, and less if compared with the greater, so the mean states,
compared with the defects, exceed, whether in feelings or actions, and
_vice versa_. The brave man, for instance, shows as rash when compared
with the coward, and cowardly when compared with the rash; similarly
too the man of perfected self-mastery, viewed in comparison with the
man destitute of all perception, shows like a man of no self-control,
but in comparison with the man who really has no self-control, he looks
like one destitute of all perception: and the liberal man compared with
the stingy seems prodigal, and by the side of the prodigal, stingy.

And so the extreme characters push away, so to speak, towards each
other the man in the mean state; the brave man is called a rash man by
the coward, and a coward by the rash man, and in the other cases
accordingly. And there being this mutual opposition, the contrariety
between the extremes is greater than between either and the mean,
because they are further from one another than from the mean, just as
the greater or less portion differ more from each other than either
from the exact half.

Again, in some cases an extreme will bear a resemblance to the mean;
rashness, for instance, to courage, and prodigality to liberality; but
between the extremes there is the greatest dissimilarity. Now things
which are furthest from one another[20] are defined to be contrary, and
so the further off the more contrary will they be.

Further: of the extremes in some cases the excess, and in others the
defect, is most opposed to the mean: to courage, for instance, not
rashness which is the excess, but cowardice which is the defect;
whereas to perfected self-mastery not insensibility which is the defect
but absence of all self-control which is the excess.

And for this there are two reasons to be given; one from the nature of
the thing itself, because from the one extreme being nearer and more
like the mean, we do not put this against it, but the other; as, for
instance, since rashness is thought to be nearer to courage than
cowardice is, and to resemble it more, we put cowardice against courage
rather than rashness, because those things which are further from the
mean are thought to be more contrary to it. This then is one reason
arising from the thing itself; there is another arising from our own
constitution and make: for in each man’s own case those things give the
impression of being more contrary to the mean to which we individually
have a natural bias. Thus we have a natural bias towards pleasures, for
which reason we are much more inclined to the rejection of all
self-control, than to self-discipline.

These things then to which the bias is, we call more contrary, and so
total want of self-control (the excess) is more contrary than the
defect is to perfected self-mastery.

Chapter IX.

Now that Moral Virtue is a mean state, and how it is so, and that it
lies between two faulty states, one in the way of excess and another in
the way of defect, and that it is so because it has an aptitude to aim
at the mean both in feelings and actions, all this has been set forth
fully and sufficiently.

And so it is hard to be good: for surely hard it is in each instance to
find the mean, just as to find the mean point or centre of a circle is
not what any man can do, but only he who knows how: just so to be
angry, to give money, and be expensive, is what any man can do, and
easy: but to do these to the right person, in due proportion, at the
right time, with a right object, and in the right manner, this is not
as before what any man can do, nor is it easy; and for this cause
goodness is rare, and praiseworthy, and noble.

Therefore he who aims at the mean should make it his first care to keep
away from that extreme which is more contrary than the other to the
mean; just as Calypso in Homer advises Ulysses,

“Clear of this smoke and surge thy barque direct;”

because of the two extremes the one is always more, and the other less,
erroneous; and, therefore, since to hit exactly on the mean is
difficult, one must take the least of the evils as the safest plan;[21]
and this a man will be doing, if he follows this method.

We ought also to take into consideration our own natural bias; which
varies in each man’s case, and will be ascertained from the pleasure
and pain arising in us. Furthermore, we should force ourselves off in
the contrary direction, because we shall find ourselves in the mean
after we have removed ourselves far from the wrong side, exactly as men
do in straightening bent timber.[22]

But in all cases we must guard most carefully against what is pleasant,
and pleasure itself, because we are not impartial judges of it.

We ought to feel in fact towards pleasure as did the old counsellors
towards Helen, and in all cases pronounce a similar sentence; for so by
sending it away from us, we shall err the less.[23]

Well, to speak very briefly, these are the precautions by adopting
which we shall be best able to attain the mean.

Still, perhaps, after all it is a matter of difficulty, and specially
in the particular instances: it is not easy, for instance, to determine
exactly in what manner, with what persons, for what causes, and for
what length of time, one ought to feel anger: for we ourselves
sometimes praise those who are defective in this feeling, and we call
them meek; at another, we term the hot-tempered manly and spirited.

Then, again, he who makes a small deflection from what is right, be it
on the side of too much or too little, is not blamed, only he who makes
a considerable one; for he cannot escape observation. But to what point
or degree a man must err in order to incur blame, it is not easy to
determine exactly in words: nor in fact any of those points which are
matter of perception by the Moral Sense: such questions are matters of
detail, and the decision of them rests with the Moral Sense.[24]

At all events thus much is plain, that the mean state is in all things
praiseworthy, and that practically we must deflect sometimes towards
excess sometimes towards defect, because this will be the easiest
method of hitting on the mean, that is, on what is right.
