The Project Gutenberg eBook of Politics, by Aristotle

This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Politics
        A Treatise on Government

Author: Aristotle

Translator: William Ellis

Release date: October 1, 2004 [eBook #6762]
                Most recently updated: January 24, 2013

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Eric Eldred, and David Widger


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK POLITICS ***




A TREATISE ON GOVERNMENT

By Aristotle

Translated From The Greek Of Aristotle By William Ellis, A.M.

London, J.M. Dent & Sons Ltd., New York, E.P. Dutton & Co. 1912.




INTRODUCTION

Aristotle, born 384 B.C., at Stagira, was the son of Nicomachus,
physician to the King of Macedonia. In 367 B.C., he went to Athens,
where he remained for twenty years as a pupil of Plato; and on the death
of the latter in 347, he went to Atarneus, in Mysia, where he married.
In 342, he was appointed teacher to Alexander, son of Philip of
Macedonia; and in 335, he opened a school in the Lyceum at Athens. on
the death of Alexander in 323, Aristotle was obliged to leave Athens; he
died at Chalcis, in Eubœa, 322 B.C.

His works include “Organum” (logic); “Rhetoric”; “Poetics”;
“Nicomachean Ethics”; “Politics”; “History of Animals”; “Physics”;
“Metaphysics”; “Psychology”; and “Meteorology.”

       *       *       *       *       *

The “Politics” of Aristotle is the second part of a treatise of which
the “Ethics” is the first part. It looks back to the “Ethics” as the
“Ethics” looks forward to the “Politics.” For Aristotle did not separate,
as we are inclined to do, the sphere of the statesman from that of
the moralist. In the “Ethics,” he has described the character necessary
for the good life, but that life is for him essentially a life to be
lived in society, and when he comes to the “Politics” he considers the
form of government under which the good life may be lived.

In the “Ethics,” he defines the happiness which is the aim of the
individual; in the “Politics,” he makes the determination of the form
of government which will best secure that happiness his aim.

Some of his Political theories are certainly not applicable to modern
conditions; we cannot accept his views on slavery, for instance; and the
Greek city-state is not a possible form of government in the modern
world. But the spirit of his enquiry is as real to-day as when he wrote.
In no other non-Christian writer is there so serious a recognition of
the responsibility of the State for the moral welfare of the citizen.
The State does not exist for the sake of mere life, but for the sake of
the good life; and that is a view which we can never afford to forget.

It is to be remembered that the “Politics” is only a fragment of a larger
work, and that it was probably left by its author in an incomplete
state. This will account for the rather abrupt ending, and for the lack
of connection between the different parts of the treatise.

The translation of William Ellis (1776) has been revised for the present
edition.

A.D.L.




CONTENTS

 BOOK I.
   Of the nature of a family and a city--Of the difference between a
   king and a magistrate--Of the members of a family, and of a
   slave--Of the difference between natural slaves and those made so by
   law--Of the domestic tie between husband and wife, father and
   son--Of the acquisition of property--Of the art of gain--Of the
   monopoly of Thales--Of the economics of a family--Of the virtues
   which belong to the different members of a family--Of the separate
   government of the women and children.

 BOOK II.
   Of the purpose of this treatise--Of the community of goods and
   wives, as recommended by Plato--Of the inconveniences of this
   system--Of the community of goods and not of wives--Of the
   inconveniences of a community of goods--Of the nature of property
   and the value of the different systems--Of the laws of Phaleas--Of
   the laws of Hippodamus--Of the Lacedæmonian government--Of the
   Cretan government--Of the Carthaginian government--Of the Athenian
   government--Of the laws of Zaleucus and Charondas.

 BOOK III.
   Of the citizen and his nature--Of the definition of a citizen--Of
   the definition of a city--Of the virtues of a citizen--Of the
   virtues of a good man--Of the social tie--Of the different forms of
   government--Of the division of governments into good and bad--Of the
   true end of the state--Of the definition of justice--Of the supreme
   power in the state--Of the nature of a king--Of the absolute
   monarchy--Of the different forms of monarchy.

 BOOK IV.
   Of the tasks of political science--Of the difference between the
   various forms of government--Of the different forms of democracy--Of
   the different forms of oligarchy--Of the republic and its forms--Of
   the definition of a republic--Of the nature of a tyranny--Of the
   reasons for the variety of forms of government--Of the best form of
   government--Of the best government for the average man--Of the
   causes of the variety of democracies and oligarchies--Of the three
   powers in the state--Of the methods of electing magistrates--Of the
   various forms of the judicial power.

 BOOK V.
   Of the nature of sedition and change in the different forms of
   government--Of the general causes of sedition--Of the causes of
   sedition in the different forms of government--Of the means for
   preserving the state--Of the method of preserving monarchies--Of the
   causes of the destruction of monarchies--Of the means for preserving
   monarchies--Of the criticism of Plato's theory of revolutions.

 BOOK VI.
   Of the different varieties of democracy--Of the nature of the
   democratic idea of liberty--Of the method of constructing a
   democracy--Of the method of constructing an oligarchy--Of the
   various magistracies in the state.

 BOOK VII.
   Of the nature of the good life--Of the life of the state--Of the
   best form of government--Of the nature of the citizen--Of the nature
   of the country--Of the position of the capital city--Of the nature
   of the citizens--Of the parts of the state--Of the definition of the
   parts of the state--Of the division of the land--Of the situation of
   the city--Of the nature of the public buildings--Of the citizens'
   education--Of the time for marriage--Of the management of
   children--Of the age for education.

 BOOK VIII.
   Of the nature of the public education--Of the subjects of
   education--Of the study of gymnastics--Of the study of music--Of the
   educational value of music.




A TREATISE ON GOVERNMENT




BOOK I


CHAPTER I

Every state is a society of some sort, and every society is established
for some good purpose; for an apparent good is the spring of all human
actions: it is evident that this is the principle upon which they are
every one founded, and this is still more true of that which is the
most principal of all, and incloses all the rest, and that is, a
political state. Now they are wrong who think that a magistrate of a
republic, a king, the master of a family, and the master of a slave are
the same; for they hold, that the difference between them consists only
in the superior or inferior number of those they govern, and not in the
nature of their authority, in this manner: that he who governs but few,
is a master of a family; he who governs many, a magistrate of a
republic; which implies, that there is no difference between a great
family and a little city: and with respect to a magistrate of a
republic and a king, that he is a king who governs by his own will; but
he who, according to the rules of the political science, governs and
submits by turns, is a magistrate of a republic: but this is false,
which will appear from hence; for if we examine things in their first
growth, we shall be able to obtain the best insight into them.

Now, it is necessary to unite those two together, which cannot exist
without each other, as the male and female, for the business of
procreation (and this not by choice, but by that natural impulse which
acts both upon plants and animals, the desire of leaving behind them
others like themselves), and the ruling and the subject power, for the
preservation of both: for that which is capable of foreseeing by the
exercise of the mind is by nature intended to be lord and master; but
that which can with its body perform such designs is a subject and a
slave; hence the master and the slave have one and the same interest.

[1252b] Nature then has distinguished between the female and the slave:
for she is not niggardly, like the artist who makes the Delphic swords,
for she constructs nothing for a double purpose, but everything for its
proper use, as every instrument is best made when it is intended for
one, and not for many uses: but among barbarians, the female and the
slave are upon a level in the community, the reason for which is, that
they have no ruling power amongst them; but their society is a society
of slave and slave, the male and the female: wherefore the poets say
it is proper for the Greeks to govern the barbarians; as if a barbarian
and a slave were by nature one. Now of these two societies the domestic
is the first, and Hesiod is right when he says, “First a house, then
a wife, then an ox for the plough,” for the poor man has always an ox
before he has a slave.

That society then which nature has established for daily support is
the families, and those who compose it are called by Charondas
“Homosipuoi,” and by Epimenides the Cretan “Homokapnoi;” but the
society of many families, which was first instituted for their lasting,
mutual advantage, is a village, and a village is most naturally
composed of the descendants of one family, whom some call “Homogalactoi,”
the children and the children’s children thereof: for which reason
cities were originally governed by kings, as the barbarian states now
are, which are composed of those who had before submitted to kingly
government; for every family is governed by the elder, as are the
branches thereof, on account of their relationship thereunto, and this
is what Homer says, “Each one rules his wife and children;” and in this
they resemble the Cyclops’ government, for they lived separately; and
thus also they think the gods are governed by a monarch, because they
themselves were so originally, and some are so still; for men imagine,
not only the forms of the gods, but their ways of life to be like their
own. But when many villages so join themselves together as to form
but one society, that society is a city, and contains in itself, if I
may so speak, the end and perfection of government: first founded that
we might live, but continued that we may live happily. For which reason
every city must be allowed to be the work of nature, if we admit that
the original society between male and female is; for to this as their
end all civil settlements tend: and the end of everything is the nature
of it. For what every being is in its most perfect state, that
certainly is the nature of that being, whether it be a man, a horse, or
a house: besides, whatsoever produces the final cause and the end which
we desire, must be best; but a government complete in itself is that
final cause and what is best. [1253a] Hence it is evident that a city
is a natural production, and that man is naturally a political animal,
and that whosoever is naturally and not accidentally unfit for society,
must be either inferior or superior to man: like the man in Homer, who
is railed at for being

“Without society, without law, without family.”

For he who is such by nature is violently addicted to war; he is like a
solitary bird of prey. For nature, as we say, does nothing in vain, and
man is the only animal whom she has endowed with the gift of speech.
And though mere sound is but an indication of pleasure or pain, and is
therefore found in other animals (for their nature attains to the
perception of pain and pleasure and the intimation of it to one
another, and no further), the power of speech is intended to set forth
the expedient and inexpedient, and therefore likewise the just and the
unjust. And it is a characteristic of man that he alone has any sense
of good and evil, of just and unjust, and the like, and the association
of living beings who have this sense makes a family and a state.

Further, the state is by nature clearly prior to the family and to the
individual, since the whole is of necessity prior to the part; for
example, if the whole body be destroyed, there will be no foot or hand,
except in an equivocal sense, as we might speak of a stone hand; for
when destroyed the hand will be no better than that. But things are
defined by their function and power; and we ought not to say that they
are the same when they no longer have their proper quality, but only
that they have the same name. The proof that the state is a creation
of nature and prior to the individual is that the individual, when
isolated, is not self-sufficing; and therefore he is like a part in
relation to the whole. But he who is unable to live in society, or who
has no need because he is sufficient for himself, must be either a
beast or a god: he is no part of a state. A social instinct is planted
in all men by nature, and yet he who first founded the state was the
greatest of benefactors. For man, when perfected, is the best of
animals, but, when separated from law and justice, he is the worst of
all; since armed injustice is the more dangerous, and he is equipped at
birth with arms, meant to be used by intelligence and virtue, which he
may use for the worst ends. Wherefore, if he have not virtue, he is
the most unholy and the most savage of animals, and the most full of
lust and gluttony. But justice is the bond of men in states, for the
administration of justice, which is the determination of what is just,
is the principle of order in political society.


CHAPTER II

Now that we have clearly seen what are the parts of which a city is
composed, it will be necessary to treat of a family, for every city is
made up of families, and every family has its parts, which are those
which constitute a complete one; and these are in their several
relations, a man and his slave, a husband and his wife, a father and
his children, and these are the three things we are to examine into:
what each of them is, and what each ought to be; that is to say, the
herile, the nuptial, and the paternal. [1253b] I take the term nuptial
and paternal, as not having any proper one of their own to express the
relation between husband and wife, father and child: to these three we
shall add a fourth, which though some authors have treated as the whole
of domestic economy, and others as a principal part of it, is not to be
overlooked; I mean the art of getting money. But let us first consider
that society which is the master and the slave, that we may see what
is necessary to it, and if we can collect anything therefrom which
may lead to a greater knowledge of the subject than is now generally
entertained; for some persons think that a government over slaves is a
particular science, and that (as we said in the beginning) the
government of a family, a slave, a republic, and a kingdom, are all the
same thing. Others think that it is contrary to nature to be a master;
for it is by law that one man is a slave and another free, though by
nature there is no difference between them; for which reason it is
unjust, as being founded in violence.

Since then a subsistence is necessary to a family, the means of
procuring it is a part of the science of economics; for without
necessaries it is impossible to live, and to live well. And as in all
arts which have a definite end, if that end is to be obtained, their
proper instruments are necessary, so is it in the economy of a family:
but of instruments some are animate and some inanimate; as to the pilot
of the ship, the rudder is an inanimate instrument, the look-out man an
animate one: for in every art a servant is to be agreed as an
instrument; thus property is a thing necessary to existence, and an
instrument of existence; and wealth is a number of instruments; and a
slave is a living possession, and every servant is an instrument
preceding and taking the lead of all other instruments. For if every
instrument could perform its own work, obeying or anticipating the will
of others, like the statues of Daedalus, or the tripods of Vulcan,
which, says the poet,

“Self-moved, enter the assembly of gods;”

if, in like manner, the shuttle would weave and the plectrum touch the
lyre without a hand to guide them, chief workmen would not want
servants, nor masters slaves. Now, what are usually called instruments,
are those with which we perform our work; but a possession is of the
nature of a thing to be used; for with a shuttle we weave a piece of
cloth, but a coat or a bed we have for our use. [1254a] And further, as
production and use differ specifically (for both of these have their
instruments), so must the instruments of each be different also. Now
life is a thing to be used, and not to be produced; therefore a slave
is a minister in things appertaining to life. A possession may be
considered as a part of anything, for a part is not only a part of
something, but depends wholly on it; so is a possession and a slave;
for a master is only a master of the slave, but does not depend on him;
but a slave is not only a slave to the master, but depends wholly on
him. It is evident then what the nature and the power of a slave is;
for he who by nature is not his own but another’s, and is yet a man,
is by nature a slave; and he may be said to be another’s who, being a
human being, is also a possession. And a possession may be defined as
an instrument of action, separable from the possessor.


CHAPTER III

But whether any one is such by nature, and whether it is advantageous
and just for any one to be a slave or no, or whether all slavery is
contrary to nature, shall be considered hereafter; not that it is
difficult either to perceive it by reason, or to learn it from fact;
for to command and to obey is not only a necessary, but a useful thing;
and some beings, from the very moment of their birth, are set apart for
one or other of these classes. There are many species of those who rule
and those who obey; and the rule is always better in proportion as
those who are ruled are better; as the rule over man is better than
the rule over a wild beast; for that work is better which is executed
by better artists; and where one commands and another obeys, there is a
work to be done. For in all things which form a composite whole and
which are made up of parts, whether continuous or discrete, a
distinction between the ruling and the subject element comes to light.
Such a duality exists in living creatures, but not in them only; it
originates in the constitution of the universe; even in things which
have no life there is a ruling principle, as in musical harmony. But we
are wandering from the subject. We will, therefore, restrict ourselves
to the living creature, which, in the first place, consists of soul and
body: and of these two, the one is by nature the ruler, and the other
the subject. But then we must look for the intentions of nature in
things which retain their nature, and not in things which are
corrupted. And therefore we must study the man who is in the most
perfect state both of body and soul, for in him we shall see the true
relation of the two; although in bad or corrupted natures the body
will often appear to rule over the soul, because they are in an evil
and unnatural condition. [1254b] At all events we may firstly observe
in living creatures both a despotical and a constitutional rule; for
the soul rules the body with a despotical rule, whereas the intellect
rules the appetites with a constitutional and royal rule. And it is
clear that the rule of the soul over the body, and of the mind and
the rational element over the passionate, is natural and expedient;
whereas the equality of the two or the rule of the inferior is always
hurtful. The same holds good of animals as well as of men; for tame
animals have a better nature than wild, and all tame animals are better
off when they are ruled by man; for then they are preserved. Again, the
male is by nature superior, and the female inferior; and the one rules,
and the other is ruled; this principle, of necessity, extends to all
mankind. Where then there is such a difference as that between soul and
body, or between men and animals (as in the case of those whose
business is to use their body, and who can do nothing better), the
lower sort are by nature slaves, and it is better for them as for all
inferiors that they should be under the rule of a master. For he who
can be, and therefore is, another’s, and he who participates in reason
enough to apprehend, but not to have, is a slave by nature. Whereas the
lower animals cannot even apprehend reason; they obey their instincts.
And indeed the use made of slaves and of tame animals is not very
different; for both with their bodies minister to the needs of life.
Nature would like to distinguish between the bodies of freemen and
slaves, making the one strong for servile labour, the other upright,
and although useless for such services, useful for political life in
the arts both of war and peace. But the opposite often happens—that
some have the souls and others have the bodies of freemen. And
doubtless if men differed from one another in the mere forms of their
bodies as much as the statues of the Gods do from men, all would
acknowledge that the inferior class should be slaves of the superior.
And if this is true of the body, how much more just that a similar
distinction should exist in the soul? but the beauty of the body is
seen, whereas the beauty of the soul is not seen. [1255a] It is clear,
then, that some men are by nature free, and others slaves, and that for
these latter slavery is both expedient and right.


CHAPTER IV

But that those who take the opposite view have in a certain way right
on their side, may be easily seen. For the words slavery and slave are
used in two senses. There is a slave or slavery by law as well as by
nature. The law of which I speak is a sort of convention, the law by
which whatever is taken in war is supposed to belong to the victors.
But this right many jurists impeach, as they would an orator who
brought forward an unconstitutional measure: they detest the notion
that, because one man has the power of doing violence and is superior
in brute strength, another shall be his slave and subject. Even among
philosophers there is a difference of opinion. The origin of the
dispute, and what makes the views invade each other’s territory, is as
follows: in some sense virtue, when furnished with means, has actually
the greatest power of exercising force: and as superior power is only
found where there is superior excellence of some kind, power seems to
imply virtue, and the dispute to be simply one about justice (for it is
due to one party identifying justice with goodwill, while the other
identifies it with the mere rule of the stronger). If these views are
thus set out separately, the other views have no force or plausibility
against the view that the superior in virtue ought to rule, or be
master. Others, clinging, as they think, to a principle of justice (for
law and custom are a sort of justice), assume that slavery in
accordance with the custom of war is justified by law, but at the same
moment they deny this. For what if the cause of the war be unjust? And
again, no one would ever say that he is a slave who is unworthy to be a
slave. Were this the case, men of the highest rank would be slaves and
the children of slaves if they or their parents chance to have been
taken captive and sold. Wherefore Hellenes do not like to call Hellenes
slaves, but confine the term to barbarians. Yet, in using this
language, they really mean the natural slave of whom we spoke at first;
for it must be admitted that some are slaves everywhere, others
nowhere. The same principle applies to nobility. Hellenes regard
themselves as noble everywhere, and not only in their own country, but
they deem the barbarians noble only when at home, thereby implying that
there are two sorts of nobility and freedom, the one absolute, the
other relative. The Helen of Theodectes says:

“Who would presume to call me servant who am on both sides sprung from
the stem of the Gods?”

What does this imply but that they distinguish freedom and slavery,
noble and humble birth, by the two principles of good and evil? They
think that as men and animals beget men and animals, so from good men a
good man springs. But this is what nature, though she may intend it,
cannot always accomplish.

[1255b] We see then that there is some foundation for this difference
of opinion, and that all are not either slaves by nature or freemen by
nature, and also that there is in some cases a marked distinction
between the two classes, rendering it expedient and right for the one
to be slaves and the others to be masters: the one practising
obedience, the others exercising the authority and lordship which
nature intended them to have. The abuse of this authority is injurious
to both; for the interests of part and whole, of body and soul, are the
same, and the slave is a part of the master, a living but separated
part of his bodily frame. Hence, where the relation of master and slave
between them is natural they are friends and have a common interest,
but where it rests merely on law and force the reverse is true.


CHAPTER V

From what has been said, it is evident that the power of a master and
that of a magistrate are not the same, nor are all governments the same
as some assert: for the one is over free men, the other over slaves;
and the government of a family is monarchical (for every house is
governed by one alone), but a city is a government of free men and
equals. A master is not so called from his knowing how to govern, but
because he is such; and in the same manner a slave and a free man. But
there may be a science of the master and a science of the slave. The
science of the slave would be such as the man of Syracuse taught, who
made money by instructing slaves in their ordinary duties. And such a
knowledge may be carried further, so as to include the art of cookery
and similar menial offices. For the duties of slaves are different,
some more honourable, others more menial; as the proverb says, “Slave
before slave, master before master.” The duties of a slave are such as
these; but the science of a master consists rather in the use than in
the possession of slaves. A master is not so called because he acquires
slaves, but because he uses them. This science, however, is not
anything great or wonderful; for what the slave ought to know how to
do, that the master ought to know how to order; for which reason, those
who are in a situation to be exempt from this trouble leave the
management of it to a steward, and spend their own time in politics or
philosophy. The art of acquiring slaves, I mean of justly acquiring
them, differs both from the art of the master and the art of the slave,
being a species of hunting or war. And enough of the distinctions
between master and slave.


CHAPTER VI

Let us now inquire generally into the nature of all kinds of property
and the art of getting wealth, in accordance with our subject; for the
slave is a part of property. [1256a] In the first place, we may ask
whether the art of getting wealth is the same with the art of managing
a family or a part of it, or instrumental to it; and if the last,
whether in the way that the art of making shuttles is instrumental to
the art of weaving, or in the way that the casting of bronze is
instrumental to the art of the statuary, for they are not instrumental
in the same way, but the one provides tools and the other material; and
by material I mean the substratum out of which any work is made; thus
wool is the material of the weaver, bronze of the statuary. Now it is
easy to see that the art of household management is not identical with
the art of getting wealth, for the one uses the material which the
other provides. For the art which uses household stores can be no other
than the art of household management. There is, however, a doubt
whether the art of getting wealth is a part of household management or
a distinct art. If the getter of wealth has to consider whence wealth
and property can be procured, but there are many sorts of property and
riches, then are husbandry, and the care and culture of animals, part
of the art of household management or distinct arts? Again, there are
many species of food, and therefore there are many kinds of lives both
of animals and men; they must all have food, and the differences in
their food have made differences in their ways of life. For of beasts,
some are gregarious, others are solitary, according to the nature of
their food, some eat grass, some eat flesh, some eat all things. Nature
has accommodated their way of life to their habits, and since the same
things are not equally pleasant to all, their instincts and ways of
life differ. So it is also with men; their lives differ with their
mode of subsistence. Some have their maintenance from the fruits of the
earth and from animals, without any trouble, or just so much as is
necessary to collect them, and these are the nomads. And since it is
necessary for their cattle to have change of pasture, they are obliged
to lead a wandering life. Others live by the chase, some hunting one
thing, some another; some live by rapine; others get their food from
fishing in lakes and rivers; while others hunt birds or wild beasts.
But the greater part of mankind live by agriculture.

Thus the different lives of men are the pastoral, the predatory, the
agricultural, and that of the hunter. [1256b] Sometimes men are forced
to combine these lives, that the one may supply what the other wants,
when a single means of support is not sufficient. Thus, if a man is a
shepherd and at the same time a freebooter, he has a double means of
support; and so of the husbandman and the hunter. And they adapt their
mode of life to their opportunities. Now this kind of property is
evidently given by nature to all living creatures, from the instant of
their first production to their full growth. For even at the beginning,
some animals bring forth with their young food enough to support them
until they can supply themselves, as the vermiparous and oviparous; but
the viviparous have milk for their young. We may therefore infer, that
what is made for man at his birth is preserved for him when he is grown
up, and that plants are for the sake of animals, and animals for the
sake of man: tame animals for the use he can make of them as well as
for the food they supply; and wild animals, if not all, at least the
greater part, are for the sake of food and other conveniences, such as
clothing and the like. If then nature makes nothing without some end in
view, nothing to no purpose, it must be that nature has made all of
them for the sake of man. For this reason the art of war is, in some
sense, a part of the art of acquisition, for hunting is a part of it,
which it is necessary for us to employ against wild beasts, and against
those of mankind who, being intended by nature for slavery, are
unwilling to submit to it, and on this occasion, such a war is by
nature just.

That species of acquisition, then, only which is according to nature,
is part of economy; and this ought to be at hand, or if not,
immediately procured, for those who are to live in society or in a
city, and store it up as necessary for life and useful to the community
of the state or family. And true wealth seems to consist in these; and
the acquisition of those possessions which are necessary for a happy
life is not infinite, though Solon says otherwise in this verse:

“No bounds to riches can be fixed for man;”

for there is a boundary fixed, as in other arts; for the instruments
of no art are infinite, either in their number or their magnitude;
[1257a] but riches are a number of instruments in domestic and civil
economy; it is therefore evident that there is a natural art of
acquisition, both in domestic and civil economy, and for what reason.


CHAPTER VII

There is another species of acquisition which they particularly call
pecuniary, and with great propriety; and by this indeed it seems that
there are no bounds to riches and wealth. Now many persons suppose this
to be the same as the other; but it is not the same, though not very
different; the one is natural, the other is not, but rather the effect
of art and skill. We will consider it in this manner: of every thing
which we possess there are two uses: both belong to the thing as such,
but not in the same manner; for one is the proper, and the other the
improper or secondary use of it. For example, a shoe is used for wear,
and is used for exchange; both are uses of the shoe. He who gives a
shoe in exchange for money or food to him who wants one, does indeed
use the shoe as a shoe, but this is not its proper or primary purpose,
for a shoe is not made to be an object of barter. The same may be said
of all other possessions, for the art of exchange extends to all of
them, and it arises at first from what is natural, from the circumstance
that some have too little, others too much. Hence we may infer that
retail trade is not a natural part of the art of getting wealth; had it
been so, men would have ceased to exchange when they had supplied each
other’s wants. In the first community, indeed, which is the family,
this art is obviously of no use, but it begins to be useful when the
society increases. For the members of the family originally had all
things in common; later, when the family divided into parts, the parts
shared in many things, and different parts in different things, which
they had to give in exchange for what they wanted, a kind of barter
which is still practised among barbarous nations who exchange with one
another the necessaries of life and nothing more; giving and receiving
wine, for example, in exchange for corn, and the like. This sort of
barter is not part of the wealth-getting art and is not contrary to
nature, but is needed for the satisfaction of men’s natural wants. For
the other or more complex form of exchange grew, as might have been
inferred, out of the simpler. When the inhabitants of one country
became more dependent on those of another, and they imported what they
needed, and exported what they had too much of, money necessarily came
into use. [1257b] For the various necessaries of life are not easily
carried about, and hence men agreed to employ in their dealings with
each other something which was intrinsically useful and easily
applicable to the purposes of life, for example, iron, silver, and the
like. Of this the value was at first measured simply by size and
weight, but in process of time it was put into a stamp, to save the
trouble of weighing, and to mark the value.

When the use of coin had once been discovered, out of the barter of
necessary articles arose the other art of wealth getting, namely,
retail trade; which was at first probably a simple matter, but became
more complicated as soon as men learned by experience whence and by
what exchanges the greatest profit could be made. Originating in the
use of coin, the art of getting wealth is generally thought to be
chiefly concerned with it, and to be the art which produces riches and
wealth; having to consider how they may be accumulated. Indeed, riches
is assumed by many to be only a quantity of coin, because the arts of
getting wealth and retail trade are concerned with coin. Others
maintain that coined money is a mere sham, a thing not natural, but
conventional only, because, if the users substitute another commodity
for it, it is worthless, and because it is not useful as a means to any
of the necessities of life, and, indeed, he who is rich in coin may
often be in want of necessary food. But how can that be wealth of which
a man may have a great abundance and yet perish with hunger, like Midas
in the fable, whose insatiable prayer turned everything that was set
before him into gold?

Hence men seek after a better notion of riches and of the art of
getting wealth than the mere acquisition of coin, and they are right.
For natural riches and the natural art of wealth-getting are a
different thing; in their true form they are part of the management of
a household; whereas retail trade is the art of producing wealth, not
in every way, but by exchange. And it is thought to be concerned with
coin; for coin is the unit of exchange and the measure or limit of it.
And there is no bound to the riches which spring from this art of
wealth getting. As in the art of medicine there is no limit to the
pursuit of health, and as in the other arts there is no limit to the
pursuit of their several ends, for they aim at accomplishing their ends
to the uttermost, (but of the means there is a limit, for the end is
always the limit), so, too, in this art of wealth-getting there is no
limit of the end, which is riches of the spurious kind, and the
acquisition of wealth. But the art of wealth-getting which consists in
household management, on the other hand, has a limit; the unlimited
acquisition of wealth is not its business. [1258a] And, therefore, in
one point of view, all riches must have a limit; nevertheless, as a
matter of fact, we find the opposite to be the case; for all getters of
wealth increase their hoard of coin without limit. The source of the
confusion is the near connection between the two sorts of wealth-getting;
in either, the instrument is the same, although the use is different,
and so they pass into one another; for each is a use of the same
property, but with a difference: accumulation is the end in the one
case, but there is a further end in the other. Hence some persons are
led to believe that getting wealth is the object of household
management, and the whole idea of their lives is that they ought either
to increase their money without limit, or at any rate not to lose it.
The origin of this disposition in men is that they are intent upon
living only, and not upon living well; and, as their desires are
unlimited they also desire that the means of gratifying them should be
without limit. Those who do aim at a good life seek the means of
obtaining bodily pleasures; and, since the enjoyment of these appears
to depend on property, they are absorbed in getting wealth: and so
there arises the second species of wealth-getting. For, as their
enjoyment is in excess, they seek an art which produces the excess of
enjoyment; and, if they are not able to supply their pleasures by the
art of getting wealth, they try other arts, using in turn every faculty
in a manner contrary to nature. The quality of courage, for example,
is not intended to make wealth, but to inspire confidence; neither is
this the aim of the general’s or of the physician’s art; but the one
aims at victory and the other at health. Nevertheless, some men turn
every quality or art into a means of getting wealth; this they conceive
to be the end, and to the promotion of the end they think all things
must contribute.

Thus, then, we have considered the art of wealth-getting which is
unnecessary, and why men want it; and also the necessary art of
wealth-getting, which we have seen to be different from the other, and
to be a natural part of the art of managing a household, concerned with
the provision of food, not, however, like the former kind, unlimited,
but having a limit.


CHAPTER VIII

And we have found the answer to our original question, Whether the art
of getting wealth is the business of the manager of a household and of
the statesman or not their business? viz., that wealth is presupposed
by them. For as political science does not make men, but takes them
from nature and uses them, so too nature provides them with earth or
sea or the like as a source of food. At this stage begins the duty of
the manager of a household, who has to order the things which nature
supplies; he may be compared to the weaver who has not to make but to
use wool, and to know, too, what sort of wool is good and serviceable
or bad and unserviceable. Were this otherwise, it would be difficult to
see why the art of getting wealth is a part of the management of a
household and the art of medicine not; for surely the members of a
household must have health just as they must have life or anything
else. [1258b] The answer is that as from one point of view the master
of the house and the ruler of the state have to consider about health,
from another the art of medicine has to do so; and so the art of
getting wealth is a part of the household management in one sense, but
in another not, but is the business of a subordinate art. But strictly
speaking, as I have already said, the means of life must be provided
beforehand by nature; for the business of nature is to furnish food to
that which is born, and the food of the offspring is always what
remains over of that from which it is produced. Wherefore the art of
getting wealth out of fruits and animals is always natural.

There are two sorts of wealth-getting, as I have said; one is a part of
household management, the other is retail trade: the former necessary
and honourable, while that which consists in exchange is justly
censured; for it is unnatural, and a mode by which men gain from one
another. The most hated sort, and with the greatest reason, is usury,
which makes a gain out of money itself, and not from the natural
object of it. For money was intended to be used in exchange, but not
to increase at interest. And this term interest, which means the birth
of money from money, is applied to the breeding of money because the
offspring resembles the parent. Wherefore of all modes of getting
wealth this is the most unnatural.


CHAPTER IX

Enough has been said about the theory of wealth-getting; we will now
proceed to the practical part. The discussion of such matters is not
unworthy of philosophy, but to be engaged in them practically is
illiberal and irksome. The useful parts of wealth-getting are, first,
the knowledge of live-stock—which are most profitable, and where, and
how—as, for example, what sort of horses or sheep or oxen or any other
animals are most likely to give a return. A man ought to know which of
these pay better than others, and which pay best in particular places,
for some do better in one place and some in another. Second, husbandry,
which may be either tillage or planting, and the keeping of bees and of
fish, or fowl, or of any animals which may be useful to man. These are
the divisions of the true or proper art of wealth-getting and come
first. Of the other, which consists in exchange, the first and most
important division is commerce (of which there are three kinds—the
provision of a ship, the conveyance of goods, exposure for sale—these
again differing as they are safer or more profitable), the second is
usury, the third, service for hire—of this, one kind is employed in the
mechanical arts, the other in unskilled and bodily labour. [1259a]
There is a third sort of wealth-getting which is between the two and
shares in both, that which comes from the earth, and from things
growing from the earth which, although they bear no fruit, are
nevertheless profitable; for example, the cutting of timber and all
mining. The art of mining, by which minerals are obtained, has many
branches, for there are various kinds of things dug out of the earth.
Of the several divisions of wealth-getting I now speak generally; a
minute consideration of them might be useful in practice, but it would
be tiresome to dwell upon them at greater length now.

Those occupations are most truly arts in which there is the least
element of chance; they are the meanest in which the body is most
deteriorated, the most servile in which there is the most use of the
body, and the most illiberal in which there is the least need of
excellence.

Works have been written upon these subjects by various persons; for
example, by Charetides the Parian, and Apollodorus the Lemnian, who
have treated of Tillage and Planting, while others have treated of
other branches; any one who cares for such matters may refer to their
writings. It would be well also to collect the scattered stories of the
ways in which individuals have succeeded in amassing a fortune; for all
this is useful to persons who value the art of getting wealth. There is
the anecdote of Thales the Milesian and his financial device, which
involves a principle of universal application, but is attributed to him
on account of his reputation for wisdom. He was reproached for his
poverty, which was supposed to show that philosophy was of no use.
According to the story, he knew by his skill in the stars while it was
yet winter that there would be a great harvest of olives in the coming
year; so, having a little money, he gave deposits for the use of all
the olive-presses in Chios and Miletus, which he hired at a low price
because no one bid against him. When the harvest-time came, and many
were wanted all at once and of a sudden, he let them out at any rate
which he pleased, and made a quantity of money. Thus he showed the
world that philosophers can easily be rich if they like, but that their
ambition is of another sort. He is supposed to have given a striking
proof of his wisdom, but, as I was saying, his device for getting
wealth is of universal application, and is nothing but the creation of
a monopoly. [1259b] It is an art often practised by cities when they
are in want of money; they make a monopoly of provisions.

There was a man of Sicily, who, having money deposited with him, bought
up an all the iron from the iron mines; afterwards, when the merchants
from their various markets came to buy, he was the only seller, and
without much increasing the price he gained 200 per cent. Which when
Dionysius heard, he told him that he might take away his money, but
that he must not remain at Syracuse, for he thought that the man had
discovered a way of making money which was injurious to his own
interests. He made the same discovery as Thales; they both contrived to
create a monopoly for themselves. And statesmen as well ought to know
these things; for a state is often as much in want of money and of such
devices for obtaining it as a household, or even more so; hence some
public men devote themselves entirely to finance.


CHAPTER X

Of household management we have seen that there are three parts—one is
the rule of a master over slaves, which has been discussed already,
another of a father, and the third of a husband. A husband and father
rules over wife and children, both free, but the rule differs, the rule
over his children being a royal, over his wife a constitutional rule.
For although there may be exceptions to the order of nature, the male
is by nature fitter for command than the female, just as the elder and
full-grown is superior to the younger and more immature. But in most
constitutional states the citizens rule and are ruled by turns, for the
idea of a constitutional state implies that the natures of the citizens
are equal, and do not differ at all. Nevertheless, when one rules and
the other is ruled we endeavour to create a difference of outward
forms and names and titles of respect, which may be illustrated by the
saying of Amasis about his foot-pan. The relation of the male to the
female is of this kind, but it lasts throughout life. The rule of a
father over his children is royal, for he receives both love and the
respect due to his age, exercising a kind of royal power. And therefore
Homer has appropriately called Zeus “Father of Gods and men,” because
he is the king of them all. For a king is the natural superior of his
subjects, but he should be of the same kin or kind with them, and such
is the relation of elder and younger, of father and son.


CHAPTER XI

[1260a] Thus it is clear that household management attends more to men
than to the acquisition of inanimate things, and to human excellence
more than to the excellence of property which we call wealth, and to
the virtue of freemen more than to the virtue of slaves. A question may
indeed be raised, whether there is any excellence at all in a slave
beyond those of an instrument and of a menial—whether he can have the
virtues of temperance, courage, justice, and the like; or whether
slaves possess only bodily and menial services. And the question on
either side is liable to difficulties. If they have virtue, in what
will they differ from freemen? On the other hand, since they are men
and share in reason, it seems absurd to say that they have no virtue. A
similar question may be raised about women and children, whether they
too have virtues: ought a woman to be temperate and brave and just, and
is a child to be called temperate, and intemperate, or not? So in
general we may ask about the natural ruler, and the natural subject,
whether they have the same or different virtues. For a noble nature is
equally required in both, but if so, why should one of them always
rule, and the other always be ruled? Nor can the difference be one of
degree, for the difference between ruler and subject is a difference of
kind, which the difference of more and less never is. Yet how strange
that the subject should have no virtue! For if he have no self-command
and no justice, how will he perform a servant’s duties? and, if the
ruler have no virtue, how can he govern well? if he lacks
self-command, he will be tyrannical and indulgent.

Both, then, must share in virtue, but in different ways, as natural
subjects also differ. The same distinction exists in the soul. The soul
has by nature a ruling and a subject part, and each of these we say has
a different virtue, that is to say, a rational and an irrational
virtue. It is clear then that the same distinction must hold in the
case of the others, so that there are many persons who are by nature
rulers and subjects. For the free man rules the slave, the male the
female, and the man the child in a different way. And all possess the
various parts of the soul, but possess them in different ways; for the
slave has not the deliberative faculty at all; the woman has, but it is
without authority, and the child has, but it is immature. So it must
necessarily be with the moral virtues also; all may be supposed to
partake of them, but only in such manner and degree as is required by
each for the fulfilment of his duty. [1260b] Hence the ruler ought to
have moral virtue in perfection, for his duty is entirely that of a
master artificer, and the master artificer is reason; the subjects, on
the other hand, require only that measure of virtue which is proper to
each of them. Clearly, then, moral virtue belongs to all of them; but
the temperance of a man and of a woman, or the courage and justice of a
man and of a woman, are not, as Socrates maintained, the same; the
courage of a man is shown in commanding, of a woman in obeying. And
this holds of all other virtues, as will be more clearly seen if we
look at them in detail, for those who say generally that virtue
consists in a good disposition or in doing one’s duty, or something of
the sort, deceive themselves; far better than such definitions is their
mode of speaking, who, like Gorgias, enumerate the virtues. All classes
must be deemed to have their special attributes; as the poet says of
women,

“Silence is a woman’s glory,”

but this is not equally the glory of man. The child is imperfect, and
therefore obviously his virtue is not relative to himself alone, but to
the perfect man and to his teacher, and in like manner the virtue of
the slave is relative to a master. Now we determined that a slave is
useful for the wants of life, and therefore he will obviously require
only so much virtue as will prevent him from failing in his duty
through cowardice and intemperance. Some one will ask whether, if what
I say is true, virtue will not be required also in the artisans, for
they often fail in their work through misconduct. But is there not a
great difference in the two cases? For the slave shares in his master’s
life; the artisan is less closely connected with him, and only attains
excellence in proportion as he becomes a slave, for the meaner sort of
mechanic has a special and separate slavery; and moreover the slave
exists by nature, not so the shoemaker or other artisan. It is
manifest, then, that the master ought to be the source of such
excellence in the slave, and not the mere possessor of the art of
mastership which trains the slave in his duties. Wherefore they are
mistaken who forbid us to converse with slaves and say that we should
employ command only, for slaves stand even more in need of admonition
than children.

The relations of husband and wife, parent and child, their several
virtues, what in their intercourse with one another is good, and what
is evil, and how we may pursue the good and escape the evil, will have
to be discussed when we speak of the different forms of government. For,
inasmuch as every family is a part of a state, and these relationships
are the parts of a family, the virtue of the part must have regard to
the virtue of the whole. And therefore women and children must be
trained by education with an eye to the state, if the virtues of either
of them are supposed to make any difference in the virtues of the
state. And they must make a difference: for the children grow up to be
citizens, and half the free persons in a state are women.

Of these matters, enough has been said; of what remains, let us speak
at another time. Regarding, then, our present inquiry as complete, we
will make a new beginning. And, first, let us examine the various
theories of a perfect state.
