The Origins of Totalitarianism: Terror and Ideology

Totalitarianism differs from other forms of political oppression such as tyranny or dictatorship. It is not merely a restriction of freedom, but an attempt to abolish the very capacity for freedom and spontaneity.

The ideal subject of totalitarian rule is not the convinced Nazi or the convinced Communist, but people for whom the distinction between fact and fiction (i.e., the reality of experience) and the distinction between true and false (i.e., the standards of thought) no longer exist.

Terror is the essence of totalitarian domination. Its corollary is the destruction of the public realm and the isolation of individuals. Terror can rule absolutely only over men who are isolated against each other. Therefore, one of the primary concerns of all tyrannical government is to bring this isolation about. Isolation may be the beginning of terror; it certainly is its most fertile ground; it always is its result.

But loneliness is not solitude. Solitude requires being alone, whereas loneliness shows itself most sharply in company with others. In solitude, I am "by myself", together with my self, and therefore two-in-one, whereas in loneliness I am actually one, deserted by all others. Totalitarianism capitalizes on this loneliness, this lack of place in the world.

Ideology is quite literally what its name indicates: it is the logic of an idea. Its subject matter is history, to which the "idea" is applied; the result of this application is not a body of statements about something that is, but the unfolding of a process which is in constant change. The ideology treats the course of events as though it followed the same "law" as the logical exposition of its "idea".

The Concentration Camps

The camps are the laboratories where changes in human nature are tested. Their goal is the fabrication of corpses, not as a byproduct of war, but as an end in itself. But before the body is destroyed, the juridical person and the moral person must be destroyed. The first step is to kill the juridical person in man... The next step is the murder of the moral person in man.
