
The Public and the Private Realm

The distinction between the public and the private realm, roughly corresponding to the distinction between the political and the household, is a key element in understanding the human condition. The rise of the social realm, which is neither private nor public, has blurred this distinction, leading to a confusion of categories that threatens the very possibility of meaningful political action.

In the ancient world, the private realm was the sphere of the household, of necessity, where the needs of life were attended to. The public realm was the sphere of freedom, where men (and alas, only men) could interact as equals, not ruled by necessity but by the desire for distinction and immortality through great deeds and words.

Today, we see the intrusion of necessity into the public sphere. Politics has become a matter of administration, of managing the economy, which is essentially housekeeping writ large. We have lost the sense of the public as a space for appearance, for the disclosure of who one is through action and speech.

Labor, Work, and Action

We must distinguish three fundamental human activities: labor, work, and action.

Labor corresponds to the biological process of the human body. The condition of labor is life itself. Labor leaves nothing behind; its products are consumed almost immediately. It is the cyclical, never-ending struggle against biological decay.

Work is the activity which corresponds to the unnaturalness of human existence, which is not embedded in the ever-recurring lifecycle of the species. Work provides an 'artificial' world of things, distinctly different from all natural surroundings. The condition of work is worldliness.

Action, the only activity that goes on directly between men without the intermediary of things or matter, corresponds to the human condition of plurality, to the fact that men, not Man, live on the earth and inhabit the world. While all aspects of the human condition are somehow related to politics, this plurality is specifically the condition – not only the conditio sine qua non, but the conditio per quam – of all political life.

The frailty of human affairs derives from the fact that we can never be sure of the outcome of our actions. One deed, and sometimes one word, suffices to change every constellation.
