The Human Condition: The Vita Activa

The term vita activa is loaded and overloaded with tradition. It is as old as our tradition of political thought. And this tradition, far from being comprehended by the concept of action, is rather in the nature of a reaction against action.

Three activities correspond to the human condition: labor, work, and action.

Labor is the activity which corresponds to the biological process of the human body, whose spontaneous growth, metabolism, and eventual decay are bound to the vital necessities produced and fed into the life process by labor. The human condition of labor is life itself.

Work is the activity which corresponds to the unnaturalness of human existence, which is not embedded in, and whose mortality is not compensated by, the species' ever-recurring life cycle. Work provides an "artificial" world of things, distinctly different from all natural surroundings. Within its borders each individual life is housed, while this world itself is meant to outlast and transcend them all. The human condition of work is worldliness.

Action, the only activity that goes on directly between men without the intermediary of things or matter, corresponds to the human condition of plurality, to the fact that men, not Man, live on the earth and inhabit the world. While all aspects of the human condition are somehow related to politics, this plurality is specifically the condition – not only the conditio sine qua non, but the conditio per quam – of all political life.

Action would be an unnecessary luxury, a capricious interference with general laws of behavior, if men were endlessly reproducible repetitions of the same model, whose nature or essence was the same for all and as predictable as the nature or essence of any other thing. Plurality is the condition of human action because we are all the same, that is, human, in such a way that nobody is ever the same as anyone else who ever lived, lives, or will live.

The Public and the Private Realm

The distinction between the private and public realms, corresponding to the household (oikos) and the political realm (polis), has existed as a distinct, separate entity at least since the rise of the ancient city-state. In the modern world, however, the two realms have constantly flowed into each other, like waves in the never-resting stream of the life process itself.

The rise of society—the "social"—has blurred this distinction. Society is the form in which the fact of mutual dependence for the sake of life and nothing else assumes public significance and where the activities connected with sheer survival are permitted to appear in public.
